Letter I.
To Mr. G. H.
Dear Sir Oxon, July 18, 1734.
HAVING heard the melancholy news of your brother's
death, I could not help sending you a line, to let
you know how much I am concerned. Indeed, I can-
not say, I am so much grieved on his account, as for that
sorrow, which the loss of so valuable a youth must necessarily
occasion to all his relations. No! I rather envy him his
blessed condition. He, unquestionably is divinely blessed,
whilst we are still left behind to wrestle with unruly passions,
and by a continued looking unto Jesus and running in our
christian race, to prefs forward to that high prize, of which
he, dear Youth, is now in full fruition. These are my true
sentiments about his death; I leave you to judge then, whe-
ther I had need be concerned on his account; and surely was
it to be put to your choice, whether so religious a young man
should live or die, no one could be so cruel, as to wish to detain
him from his wished-for glory. Be not then too much con-
cerned at his death, but let us rather learn that important
lesson, which his whole life taught us: "That there is no-
thing comparable to an early piety. "I thought to have
spent many agreeable hours with him in christian and edifying
conversation, when I came to Gloucester; but he is gone to
more agreeable company, and long before now has joined the
heavenly choir.
I shall only add, that as your brother imitated our blessed
Saviour in his life, so I pray God, he may resemble him in
his death, and be a means, like his beloved Redeemer, of
reconciling all former animosities, which is the hearty wish
of, dear Sir,
Your sincere friend and humble servant,
G. W.
LETTER II.
To Mr. G. H.
Dear Sir, Bristol, Sept. 10, 1734.
THIS morning I wrote to you in haste, expecting Mr.
I. would soon be going; but to my great satisfaction,
he came hither this night, and soon afterwards, your very much
wished-for letter was brought to hand; which (after ten thou-
sand thanks for so many repeated favours) I shall now beg
leave to answer. You tell me "Mr. P. likes N." God
be praised! That he hath recommended something to my
perusal. I'll read it, God willing, with care, at my return.
"That he wants to know my quality, state, condition, circum-
"stances, &c." Alas! that anyone should enquire after such
a wr&ch as I am. However, since he hath been so kind,
pray tell him, that as for my quality, I was a poor, mean
drawer; but by the distinguishing grace of God, am now
intended for the ministry. As for my estate, that I am a ser-
vitor; and as to my condition and circumstances, I have not of
my own any where to lay my head. But my friends, by God's
providence, minister daily to me, and in return for such un-
merited, unspeakable blessings, I trust the fame good Being
will give me grace to dedicate myself without reserve to his
service. To "spend and be spent" for the welfare of my
fellow-creatures, endeavouring to promote the gospel of his
Son as much as lies in my poor power. But "observe his
"humility," says Mr. H. Aye, catch an old Christian
without profound humility, if you can. Believe me, Sir, it
is nothing but this flesh of ours, those cursed feeds of the
proud apostate, which lie lurking in us, that make us to think
ourselves worthy of the very air we breathe. When our eyes
are opened by the influences of divine grace, we then shall
begin to think of ourselves as we ought to think, even, that
God is all, and we are less than nothing. Well, you may-
cry, O happy temper, could I but learn of Christ to be meek
and lowly in hearty I should certainly find rest to my soul.
May God, for his dear Son's sake, give it to you, to me,
and to all our dear friends! "Some like, some dislike the ex-
"tract," you say. I did not do it, to please man, but God.
"Mr. W. is too much engaged in temporals." Is he? Oh
dear Sir, pray that when I enter the ministry, I may be wholly
engaged in spirituals: But "Mrs. H. has been ill, and is
"now recovered." God be praised for both! Our Saviour,
Sir, learnt obedience by the things which he suffered, so must:
we. Pain, if patiently endured, and sanctified to us, is a great
purifier of our corrupted nature. It will teach us excellent
lessons. I hope MR. H. has been enabled to learn some
of them. So much in answer to your kind letter. You say
"it was too long." Believe me, Sir, it was much short;
but a line is more than I deserve. However, I have made out
in mine, what was wanting in yours. My Mother's jour-
ney to Gloucester, I fear, is spoiled by the weather. God's
blessed will be done! I hope to be with you about next Tuesday
sevennight. "I am missed," you say; and you may well miss
such a troublesome guest. Well, God will reward you richly,
I trust. Never despair of my brother; when God acts upon
the soul, he makes quick work of it. Be pleased to tell Mr.
M. that his remissness hath occasioned me many a sigh, and his
return from his relapse, matter of abundant thanks to God in
his behalf. Oh let us young, unexperienced soldiers, be always
upon our guard; the very moment we desert our post, the
enemy rushes in; and if he can but divert our eyes from look-
ing heavenward, he will soon so blind us, that we shall not
look towards it at all. A great deal may be learned from a
little fall. But I must not detain you any longer, than to assure
you how much I am, Dear Sir,
Your and Mrs. H.'s sincere friend and servant,
in our common Lord,
G. W.
LETTER III.
To Mr. H.
Dear Sir, Oxon, Sept. 17, 1734.
I Had the favour of your letter last Friday, which brought
me the agreeable news of your and Mrs, H,'s welfare, to-
gether with the much-desired account of your approving the
scheme, inclosed in my last. Indeed, I did not doubt of its
meeting; with a candid reception, from all those persons to
whom it was recommended. Their known concern for reli-
gion, giving me sufficient assurance, that nothing can be un-
acceptable to them, which any way tended to promote their
improvement in the divine life. It must be confessed, indeed,
as you very justly observed, that we must make a great pro-
gress in religion, and be inured by frequent prayer and medi-
tation, to the extatic contemplation of heavenly objects, before
we can arrive at true heavenly-mindedness; and, perhaps, after
all our endeavours, whilst our souls are immersed in these
fleshly tabernacles, we shall make but very small advances in so
delightful and glorious an undertaking. But believe me, Sir,
you cannot imagine, how vastly serviceable the constant use of
all the means of religion will be, in acquiring this blessed habit
of mind. Such, as an early rising in the morning, public
and private prayer, a due temperance in all things, and fre-
quent meditation on the infinite love and purity of that un-
paralleled pattern of all perfection, our dear Redeemer. As
for your mentioning, Sir, the degeneracy of the age, as the
least objection against our making further advances in any
religious improvement, I cannot by any means admit of it.
The scriptures (as I take it) are to be the only rules of action.
And the examples of our blessed Lord and his apostles, the
grand patterns whereby we are to form the conduct of our
lives. It is true, indeed, that instances of an exalted piety
are rarely to be met with in the present age, and one would
think, if we were to take an estimate of our religion, from the
lives of most its professors, that christianity was nothing but
a dead letter. But then it is not our religion, but ourselves
that are to be blamed all this while. Would we live as the
primitive christians did, we might no doubt have the same
assistance vouchsafed us, as they had. God's grace is never
restrained, and though we should not arrive at those heights
of heavenly-mindedness, as some of the primitive christians
were eminent for, yet, methinks we should imitate them as far
as we can, and rely on the divine goodness for grants of such
a supply of grace, as he, in his good pleasure, shall judge most
convenient for us. Be pleased to fend for Mr. Law's Chrtstian
Perfection for me against my coming into the country, if
printed in a small edition. I am, with due respects to self,
spouse, and all other friends,
Your's sincerely,
G. W.
LETTER IV.
Dear Sir, Oxon Dec. 4, 1734.
T Am heartily glad to hear that the country parson has had so
good an effect upon you, and that you are resolved to set in
earnest, about working out your salvation: Be sure; quench not
these first motions; but go on vigorously and manfully, without
the least regard to what the world may say; if you can once
break with that, you are safe. The prayers, I hope to send
you next week. Only let me give you this caution, no to
depend on any advice or book, that is given you; but solely
on the grace of God attending it. The book which I have
sent to my brother, and would recommend to you and all my
Gloucester friends, will soon convince you how dangerous it is
to be a lukewarm christian, and that there is nothing to be
done without breaking from the world, denying ourselves daily,
taking up our cross, and following Jesus Christ. These
things may seem a little terrible at first, but believe me, they
are nothing but suggestions of our enemy to deter us from
setting out; and if you can credit me, mortification itself, when
once practised, is the greatest pleasure in the world But hold,
I shall transgress the time prescribed me, therefore give me
only leave to add my hearty prayer for your successful pro-
gress in religion, and to subscribe myself in great haste,
Dear Sir,
Your sincere friend and humble servant,
G. W.
LETTER V.
Dear Sir, Oxon Feb. 20, 1735.
I Believe you think me a strange sort of a person, for not
being so good as my word in coming down this winter
and what is worse, in not letting you have a line to acquaint
you of my reasons for it. And indeed, I am not as yet de-
termined; providence having ordered (I hope) that this
seeming unkindness shall, in the end, prove very serviceable
on all sides. However, though I have been thus hindered, yet,
I think you heard from me last, and am really surprized to
find you should, now so long since, have desired that col-
lection of prayers, and be wholly unconcerned about them
ever after. Indeed, they will be of no service to you, unless
you grant me this one postulatum: "That we must renounce
ourselves." What the meaning of this phrase may be, the
preface to the prayers will best inform you. I did not doubt of
its meeting with but a cold reception, it being (at first view)
so very contrary to flesh and blood. For, perhaps, you may
think, that this renouncing of ourselves, must necessarily lead
us (as it certainly does) to acts of self-denial and mortification;
and, that we probably may be saved without them. And lest
you should after all imagine, (which I trust you will not)
that true religion does consist in any thing, besides an entire
renewal of our natures into the image of God; I have sent
you a book entitled, The Life of God in the Soul of Man,
written by a young, but an eminent Christian, which will in-
form you, what true religion is, and by what means you may
attain it. As likewise, how wr&chedly most people err in
their sentiments about it, who suppose it to be nothing else (as
he tells us on page 3d) but a mere model of outward performances;
without ever considering, that all our corrupt passions must
be subdued, and a complex habit of virtues, such as meekness,
lowliness, faith, hope, and the love of God and of man, be
implanted in their room, before we can have the least title to
enter into the kingdom of God. Our divine master having ex-
pressly told us, that "unless we renounce ourselves, and take
"up our cross daily, we cannot be his disciples." And again,
"unless we have the spirit of Christ, we are none of his."
You will scarce have time, I imagine, before Mr. H. leaves
Gloucester, to revise, what I have recommended to your perusal.
However, be pleased to let me hear from you by him, together
with an account of your free sentiments about this matter. I
trust (by God's grace) we shall, at last, rightly understand one
another's meaning. I should be glad to hear too, whether you
keep morning prayers, and how often you receive the holy com-
munion, there being nothing, which so much be-dwarfs us
in religion, and hinders our progress towards the heavenly
Canaan, as starving our souls by keeping away from the
heavenly banquet. I have nothing more to add at present on
this subject, till you favour me with a line, which, I hope, you
will not fail doing by Mr. H. who will willingly bring it to,
Dear Sir,
Your sincere friend and very humble servant,
G. W.
LETTER VI.
Dear Sir, Oxon, March 6, 1735.
I Had the favour of your letter by Mr. H. and, as desired,
I have made enquiry about the post-masters and clerks
of Merton. As to the former, I hear, that the five senior fel-
lows have each a power to elect one in his turn, and that there
is now a vacancy, but one ready on the spot to supply it, and
no likelihood of there being another this long while. The
latter, are solely in the power of the warden, and though all
the places are at present filled up, yet, there will be a vacancy
next term, so that, perhaps, by a seasonable application, your
brother may get a friend in. Thus much for business. As
for the other particular, specified in the latter part of your last;
I find by what I can gather from your own and my brother's
expressions, as well as from Mr. H.'s discourse, that my late
letters have met with but a cold reception; and that you seem
desirous of hearing no more of so seemingly ungrateful a sub-
ject, as submitting our wills to the will of God; which, in-
deed, is all that is implied in that phrase (which our enemy
would represent as so formidable to us) of renouncing ourselves.
Alas, Sir! what is there that appears so monstrously terrible
in a doctrine that is, (or at least ought to be) the constant sub-
ject of our prayers, whenever we put up that petition of our
Lord's: "Thy will be done in earth, as it is in Heaven."
The import of which seems to be this. Ift, That we do every
thing that God wills, and nothing but what he willeth.
2dly, That we do everything he wills, only in the manner
he willeth, 3dly, That we do those things he willeth, only
because he willeth. This is all, Sir, I have been endeavour-
ing to inculcate in my late letters; and though it seems as
clear as the light, upon an impartial and considerate view,
yet, our grand impostor (whose very corruption is having a will
distinct from, and therefore contrary to God's) would fain
set it out in the most hideous colours, as though we were
"Setters forth of strange doctrines;" or proposing some higher
degrees of perfection, than every ordinary Christian is obliged
to aspire after; whereas, in truth, it is nothing but the simple
and evident language of the gospel. It must be confessed,
that through the corruption of our depraved nature, and that
power, which self-will has, since the Fall, usurped in the
soul, we must necessarily break through a great many ob-
stacles. But, dear Sir, be not dismayed, the difficulty lies only
in our first setting out. Be but vigorous at the first onset, and
never fear a conquest. The renewal of our natures is a work
of great importance. It is not to be done in a day. We
have not only a new house to build up, but an old one to pull
down. But then, methinks, this would be an odd way of
reasoning, "Because a thing requires some pains, I therefore,
will never set about it." No, Sir, rather up and be doing.
Exert your utmost efforts at your first setting out, and take my
word, your strength as well as resolution will increase daily.
The means also which are necessary to be used in order to at-
tain this end, our cursed adversary the devil would represent
to us in the most hideous forms imaginable. But believe me.
Sir, the difficulty here too, only lies in our first breaking from
ourselves, and that there is really more pleasure in these for-
midable duties of self-denial and mortification, than in the
highest indulgences of the greatest epicure upon earth. Give
me leave, dear Sir, only to remind you of one particular,
which, if duly observed, will vastly facilitate your future en-
deavours. Let the scriptures, not the world, be your rule
of action. By those you are to form your practice here, and
to be judged hereafter. Upon this account, for the future, I
should be glad, if you would communicate what passes be-
tween you and me, to none but my brother and your spouse.
And if you have any, the least scruple, be pleased to send me
word of it by a letter in an open, friendly manner; and, by
God's blessing, all things will be yet set right; only be fer-
vent in prayer. As for what the Rev. Mr. Hoar has been
pleased to say, either to you or Mr. H, it is not my business
(out of deference, as he is so much my superior, as to the
dignity of his office, his age, and his learning) to make any
reply. I shall only add, what I am sure I can prove, "That
"the gospel tells us that there is but one thing needful.
"That we cannot sit down content with just such a degree
"of goodness, and claim just such a proportionable degree of
"glory;" but that "we are to love the Lord with all our
"souls, strength, &c." and that "he who endureth to the
"end, (and he only) shall be saved." There is a little trea-
tise lately come out, which I have made bold to send to Mr;
Hoar; where we may be fully convinced by argument deducible
merely from reason, "that God is our sole end," and that
barely upon a principle of prudence, (supposing we could be
happy without it) we ought to press forward, in order to attain
the greatest degrees of happiness hereafter. Whether this
letter, Sir, may prove as offensive as the former, is not my
business to enquire. God's will be done in all things.
He, and he alone can (and indeed will, if we are desirous of
it ourselves) work this conviction in our minds. Give me
leave just to add, that I thought it my duty to answer these few
objections, that have been raised against the difficulty of
conforming our wills to the will of God, by showing that
the greatest struggle lies only at our first beginning, and that
it is no more than what is indispensably necessary for our
salvation. As for the means to be employed for the attain-
ment of this end, I shall be wholly silent: Being sensible,
that if you are once fully convinced of the greatness of it,
you will be necessarily carried on to the use of such means as
God has constituted for that purpose. I hope my writing
after this manner, Sir, will not be esteemed a piece of self-
conceit, or be an instrument of unloosing our former band of
friendship, which was once designed to be bound the faster,
by tying it with a religious knot. But whether this proves to
be the event, or not, of my telling my friends the truth, I
wholly leave to God's Providence. Be pleased however to
favor me with a line in return, and give me leave to subscribe
myself, Dear Sir,
Your sincere friend and most obliged humble servant,
G. W.
LETTER VII.
My dear friend Bristol June 12, 1735.
LAST night about eight o'clock, your good spouse and
myself came safe to our journey's end, and met with
a very kind reception from all parties. After you left us,
the ladies grew more serious, and at last by the assistance of
Mr. Norris, our discourse ran into a proper channel. My
brother does not propose sailing this fortnight; but tho' he
stays longer than he proposed, yet I hope to be at Gloucester on
Wednesday, for methinks my heart is still there, tho' my
body be at thirty miles distance. On whose account, I leave
you to guess. I cannot help reflecting on Sunday. Did not
those sighs, think you, Sir, proceed from some unusual medi-
tations on the importance of religion? Were they not some
infant strugglings after the new birth? Surely they were.
And I trust ere long, after a few strugglings with corrupted
nature, the Holy Ghost will replenish your heart with comfort
and peace. Proper retirement and solitude are no bars; but
rather great helps to a religious life. We find, our Saviour
was led into a wilderness, before he entered on his public
ministry, and so must we too, if we ever intend to tread in
his steps. As for my brother, I trust the cares of the world,
the desire of riches, &c. will not always choke the good
seed. However, I hope you my dear friend will not defer
so important a thing. But, why do I say hope, when I am
assured you will not. Methinks, I would willingly undergo
the pangs, so you might enjoy the pleasures of the new birth.
But this must not be. All we can do is to sympathize
with and pray for each other, which I hope will not be want-
ing on either side, as such a close friendship has commenced
between dear Mr. H. and
Your sincere friend and humble servant,
G. W.
LETTER VIII.
Dear Sir, Bristol, Sept. 5, 1735.
HOW welcome is a line from a faithful friend? Even as
welcome as a shower of rain in a droughty season. But
here's the misfortune, the very kindnesses of friends may be
cruelty: Commendations, or even, the hinting at them, are
poison to a mind addicted to pride. A nail never sinks
deeper than when dipped in oil. A friend's words may be softer
than butter, and notwithstanding be very swords. Pray for
me, dear Sir, and heal the wound you have made. To God
alone give glory. To sinners nothing belongs, but shame and
confusion. So much in answer to one part of your too kind
letter. Mrs. Powell you say continues very ill. No wonder.
Sir; desperate diseases must have desperate remedies. Satan has
desired to sift her as wheat; but Christ will pray for her,
I trust, and then her faith will not fail. Oxford friends have
not been wanting in letters, and I find I must not stay much
longer here. For some are going to travel, some are dead,
and one is married, so that we must join and warm one ano-
ther, as well as we can in their absence. I hope to feast
with you at Crypt next Sunday. Amazing, that ever sinners
should sit with their Savior! To what dignity has Christ
exalted human nature. And how did he do it? Why, by
humbling himself. Let us go and do likewise. Give me
leave, with due respects to all friends, to subscribe myself.
Your and spouse's very humble servant and sincere friend,
G. W.
P. S. If Mr. Pauncefort's petitions run after this manner
for me, I should be thankful : "That God would finish the
good work he has begun in me, that I may never seek nor be
fond of worldly preferment ; but employ every mite of thofe
talents it shall pleafe God to entrust me with, to his
glory and the church's good, and likewise, that the endea-
vours of my friends to revive true religion in the world, may
meet with proper success."
LETTER IX.
Dear Sir, Bristol, Sept, l8, 1735.
AS you did not expect to hear from me till Mr. B-d
came, I hope you have not as yet accused me of being
too dilatory in writing. Now I have taken the freedom,
what can be more proper for me to begin with, than to return
ten thousand thanks for those innumerable favours conferred
on me at your house? I trust they are all registered in the
court of heaven, and will in due time meet with a suitable
return from my all-gracious and good benefactor. Next to
this, I imagine you will enquire, how I like Bristol? As for
the place itself, that, like all others, is indifferent to me,
who have here no continuing city, but seek one to come;
and as for the inhabitants, though they teach me nothing else,
yet I may learn this one important lesson, that unless I am
very vigilant, the children of this world, will be much wiser
in their generation, than I, who, by the grace of God, hope
am a child of light. Alas! was I half so solicitous to attain
heavenly, as they are worldly riches, I should be rich indeed.
That you all may be rich towards God, is the hearty prayer
of, dear Sir, Your very unworthy,
but sincere friend and humble servant,
G. W.
LETTER X.
Dear Sir, Oxon, March 13, 1736.
I Have now but just time to acquaint you, that God gave
me a pleasant and safe journey, and what was still a
greater blessing, a joyful meeting with my zealous, hearty,
sincere friends. The alderman bore my expenses, and was
very agreeable company; so that on all accounts I have
great reason to thank my good and gracious God, and to
beg others to join with me in that important, that delightful
duty. You will not forget retaining your old custom of
reading and singing. It's bad to leave off a good custom,
and the best way to make progress in religion, is to per-
sist in, and to improve on the means we enjoy. I suppose
honest James by this time is with you. My hearty love to
him, and tell him, it would do his heart good to see what
a number of true altogether Christians here are of his rank.
I hope he will let none of them outstrip him: He must watch
and pray against self-indulgence, sloth, &c. especially if he
goes to a place where plenty of all things abound. My
due respects and hearty thanks to Mrs. H. and all friends.
I hope none of their kindnesses will ever be forgotten by
Your sincere friend in great haste,
G. W.
LETTER XI.
Dear Sir, Oxon, April 2, 1736.
WHAT a comfort is it for Christian friends to relate
to each other the loving-kindness of the Lord?
O let his praises be ever in our mouths, that we may be telling
of his salvation from day to day. O dear Sir, I heartily join
with you in the delightful duty of thanksgiving. I hope that
you will have every day more and more experimental proofs
of that intercourse which is carried on between God in
heaven, and saints on earth.
I must now inform you, that the person, who under
God has given me the annuity, is Sir John Philips of Lon-
don. The occasion of it was as follows. Upon my com-
ing up, two or three of our trusty friends were called from
us, and being solicitous to keep up our society here, the
gentleman to whom you sent the book, wrote to Sir John
Philips and proposed me (alas! how unfit) as a proper person
to stay here and encourage our friends in fighting the good
fight of faith. Accordingly, he immediately offered me an an-
nuity of twenty pounds. To show his disinterestedness, he
has promised me that, whether I continue here or not; and
if I resolve to stay at Oxon, he'll give me thirty pounds a year.
If that will not do, I may have more; so that you see, my
dear friend, what a critical point it is. All that we have to
do is to pray, and watch Providence between this and June,
when I propose, God willing, to enter into orders, and
then no doubt my call will be clear. What makes me to
think that this is a call from God is, that it will be con-
venient for taking my degree, and improving me in my stu-
dies. Whether it be or no, God only knows; Father, there-
fore into thy hands I commend my spirit, for thou hast re-
deemed me, O Lord thou God of truth. I approve greatly
of your reading Henry. God works by him here greatly,
and may the Lord prosper it in your hands. Good dear Sir,
never leave off watching, reading, praying, striving, till you
experimentally find Christ Jesus formed within you. In a
particular manner, my dear friend, watch against all tempt-
ations to sloth. When you receive the sacrament, earnestly
endeavour to be inwardly bettered by it the week following.
Live every day as holily as you can. Be frequent in self-
examination morning and evening. Pray earnestly from your
heart. Wrestle with God, beg him to hasten the new
birth. Moreover, be careful, diligent in your calling, labor
hard with your own hands, that you may have to give to
him that needeth. And labor not so much for the meat
that perishes, as to neglect pursuing that which endures
to eternal life. O Mr. H., my bowels are enlarged towards
you. Believe me to be your sincere, though unworthy friend,
G. W.
LETTER XII.
Dear Mr. H., Oxon, April 22, 1736.
NOW tell me the truth, have not you called me un-
grateful? If you have not, it is more than I deserve. I
have nothing to plead but business, as an excuse for not
answering your last kind letter. Well, forgive me this
once, and if I offend so again, then call me ungrateful
indeed. You ordered me to make no acknowledgments for
kindnesses received. You'll suffer me to ask another favour,
if not to return any more thanks. Be so kind then, dear
Sir, to desire your brother to write to me as soon as possible.
My good friend, Sir John Philips, has promised me thirty
pounds a year, if I'll continue at Oxford, and yet I am in
doubt, whether that annuity, and the being appointed to
serve the prison here, will be a sufficient title for orders, there-
fore I beg both his advice and prayers. This is all I think,
that concerns outward affairs. But this solemn season na-
turally leads me to say a word or two on a more impor-
tant subject, "the death and passion of our blessed Lord
and Saviour." If I mistake not, you commemorate it to-
morrow at Crypt. And blessed be God, I do at Christ
Church. And oh that we may commemorate it as we ought;
that we may fix our thoughts intensely on that great ex-
emplar and all atoning blood; that we may grow in
love with his meekness and patience, and endeavour daily
to be conformed to his most blessed image. Surely we can-
not grow angry at trifles, when the Son of God endured
such bitter usage, without the least murmur or complaint.
Surely, we cannot repine at any dispensations of Provi-
dence though ever so severe, when we consider, how it pleased
God to bruise our Saviour and lay upon him the iniqui-
ties of us all. Whatever befalls us, is but the due reward
of our crimes; but this Redeemer had done nothing amiss:
he was bruised for our iniquities. I could run through
every part of our Lord's sufferings, and show how neces-
sary it is that we should sympathize with him in every parti-
cular. But as it now grows late, and I want a little time to
prepare for tomorrow's solemnity, you'll excuse me if I now
only paraphrase a little on the prayer of the thief on the cross.
Lord remember us and pray for us; Lord remember us
and rule us; Lord remember us and prepare a place for us.
Lord remember us in the hour of death, and in the day of
judgment. My due respects to all friends, and am sincerely
Yours,
G. W.
LETTER XIII.
My dear Friend, Gloucester, June 20, 1736.
THIS is a day much to be remembered, O my soul!
for about noon, I was solemnly admitted by good
Bishop Benson, before many witnesses, into holy orders, and
was, blessed be God, kept composed both before and after
imposition of hands. I endeavoured to behave with unaf-
fected devotion; but not suitably enough to the greatness of
the office I was to undertake. At the same time, I trust,
I answered to every question from the bottom of my heart,
and heartily prayed that God might say Amen. I hope the
good of souls will be my only principle of action. Let
come what will, life or death, depth or height, I shall
henceforth live like one who this day, in the presence of
men and angels, took the holy sacrament, upon the profes-
sion of being inwardly moved by the Holy Ghost to take upon
me that ministration in the church. This I began with
reading prayers to the prisoners in the county gaol. Whe-
ther I myself shall ever have the honor of styling myself a
prisoner of the Lord, I know not; but indeed, my dear
friend, I can call heaven and earth to witness, that when
the Bishop laid his hand upon me, I gave myself up to
be a martyr for him, who hung upon the cross for me.
Known unto him are all future events and contingencies; I
have thrown myself blindfold, and I trust without reserve, into
his almighty hands; only I would have you observe, that till
you hear of my dying for, or in my work, you will not be
apprized of all the preferment that is expected by
Yours, &c., G. W.
LETTER XIV.
My dear Friend, Gloucester, June 23, 1736.
NEVER a poor creature set up with so small a stock.
When the good Bishop, who ordained me on Sun-
day, gave out last year in his visitation charge, that he would
ordain none under full three and twenty, my heart leaped
for joy, for then I thought my friends would not only be
disappointed in their hope of having me enter into orders so
soon, but that I should also have time (as was my inten-
tion) to make at least a hundred sermons, with which to
begin my ministry; but this is so far from being the case,
that I have not a single one by me, except that which I made
for a small Christian society, and which I sent to a neighbor-
ing clergyman, to convince him how unfit I was to take upon
me the important work of preaching. He kept it for a fort-
night, and then sent it back with a guinea for the loan of it;
telling me he had divided it into two, and had preached it
morning and evening to his congregation. With this sermon
I intend to begin, God willing, next Sunday, not doubting,
but that he, who increased a little lad's loaves and fishes
for the feeding of a great multitude, will from time to time,
in the proper use of appointed means, supply me with spi-
ritual food for whatever congregation he in his all-wise
Providence shall be pleased to call me to. Help, help me,
my dear friend, with your warmest addresses to the throne
of grace, that I may not only find mercy, but grace to help
in time of need. At present this is the language of my heart,
a guilty weak and helpless worm into thy arms I fall,
Be thou my strength, my righteousness, my Jesus, and my all.
Oh cease not, for I must again repeat it, cease not to pray for
Yours, &c.
G. W.
LETTER XV.
Dear Mrs. H., Gloucester, June 28, 1736.
ACCORDING to my promise I am now seated to write
you a farewell letter. For providence seems to de-
mand my presence at Oxford immediately, and therefore I pro-
pose being there, God willing, on Monday night. But first
let me return dear Mrs. H., my heartiest thanks for all past kind-
nesses, and assure her, that my incessant prayers shall never be
wanting, that God may not forget her labor of love, in that
she has so plentifully administered to me, his unworthy servant,
and yet does minister. Tomorrow I am to preach at Crypt,
but believe I shall displease some, being determined to speak
against their assemblies. But I must tell them the truth, or
otherwise I shall not be a faithful minister of Christ. Had
providence so ordered, I should have been glad to have given
you the cup of blessing; but since that favor is denied to me,
I am resigned. However, I hope I shall not be unmindful of
you, when I come near your place, nor be wanting in my
prayers, that God would mercifully supply the want of out-
ward means to you, by the operation of his Holy Spirit. I
suppose you are, by this time, pretty well reconciled to Wor-
cester, and that providence has shown you that we may
serve God acceptably in any place. Yes, Madam, let but
our hearts be upright towards him, and by faith united to
our dear Lord Jesus, we shall find that wherever we are, he
will be with us, and we shall be with him. So far I had
written on Saturday night; but being detained here in expec-
tation of seeing my brother James (who has not as yet been
so good as his word) I believe I can now acquaint you that I
must set out on Wednesday morning. I preached yesterday at
Crypt, and was mercifully supported and assisted, for which-
great blessing, I hope you will return hearty thanks in my be-
half. I trust Miss James continues her former earnest desires to
be renewed in the spirit of her mind; for nothing will do but
that. Indeed we may flatter ourselves, that we may go to
heaven without undergoing the pangs of the new birth; but
we shall certainly find ourselves desperately mistaken in the
end. For till we are changed, till we are made meet for, we
cannot in the nature of the thing be partakers of the heaven-
ly inheritance with the saints in light. Let us therefore
never cease praying and striving, till we find this blessed
change wrought in us, and thereby we ourselves brought off
from relying on any or all outward ordinances for salvation.
Our good bishop Benson was pleased to give me another present
of five guineas, a great supply for one who has not a guinea in
the world. May the great Bishop of souls amply reward both
him and you, for all favors conferred on
Your sincere friend and humble servant,
G. W.
LETTER XVI.
My Dear Friend, Gloucester, June 30, 1736.
GLORY! glory! glory! be ascribed to an almighty triune
God.—Last Sunday in the afternoon, I preached my
first sermon in the church of St. Mary De Crypt, where I was
baptized, and also first received the sacrament of the Lord's
supper. Curiosity, as you may easily guess, drew a large con-
gregation together upon the occasion. The sight at first a
little awed me; but I was comforted with a heart-felt sense of
the divine presence, and soon found the unspeakable advan-
tage of having been accustomed to public speaking when a boy
at school, and of exhorting and teaching the prisoners and poor
people at their private houses, whilst at the university. By
these means I was kept from being daunted over much. As I
proceeded, I perceived the fire kindled, till at last, though so
young, and amidst a crowd of those who knew me in my
infant childish days, I trust, I was enabled to speak with some
degree of gospel authority. Some few mocked, but most for
the present seemed struck; and I have since heard, that a com-
plaint had been made to the bishop, that I drove fifteen mad the
first sermon. The worthy prelate, as I am informed, wished
that the madness might not be forgotten before next Sunday,
Before then, I hope, my sermon upon 'He that is in Christ, is a
new creature,' will be completed. Blessed be God, I now
find freedom in writing. Glorious Jesus,
Being thus engaged, I must hasten to subscribe myself,
my dear Sir, Yours, &c.
G. W.
LETTER XVII.
Dear Mrs. H., Oxon, July 7, 1736.
WHAT shall I say in defense of my seemingly ungrate-
ful silence? Why, I hope, your kindness will ac-
cept of the reasons I gave in Mrs. Well's letter, as a sufficient
excuse for it, nothing but those, I assure you, being the cause
of it. Well then, presuming on your kind pardon, give me
leave, (after all acknowledgments of gratitude for kindnesses
received) to bid you once more welcome to Gloucester, and to
wish you and Mr. H., with all my soul, the greatest comfort,
that either this or the other world can afford you. It's true,
indeed, we must not expect much comfort here, except what
results from a good conviction that we are in a safe state, by
being born again of the Holy Ghost. This, will afford
us inexpressible satisfaction, even on this side of the grave.
It will give us ease in pain, because we know, if we bear it pa-
tiently, it will end in glory. This, will make us meek and
gentle under crosses and disappointments, because we know we
are taught to expect them, and that our blessed Master has gone
before us in them. In short, it will make us easy in every
station, because we have a general promise, that all things shall
work for good to them that love God. But supposing we
were to have no pleasure on this side of Heaven, yet the
thoughts of being happy, and that too for all eternity here-
after, methinks should teach us to bear up under every cala-
mity here, not only with submission, but a holy joy. Good
God! the very idea of what we are to be in glory, transports
me while I am writing. There, there, Mrs. H., we shall see
the blessed Jesus, whom our souls have so eagerly thirsted after
in this life, surrounded with glory, and attended with myriads
of his holy angels, who will rejoice at our safe arrival to their
happy mansions, and with repeated echoes welcome us to
heaven. There, there, we shall not only see, but live with
him and enjoy him too, not for a day, a month, a year, an
age, but to all eternity. And who can tell the pleasure,
comfort, peace, joy, delight, and transport, a glorified saint
will feel in the possession of his wished-for, longed-for, ever
adorable, ever gracious, blessed, beloved, triune God, and that
for ever? Surely the happiness will be so great, that eye hath
not seen, nor ear heard, neither can the heart of man con-
ceive the thousandth part thereof. And yet, great as it is, I
not only wish, but have good hope through Christ, that not
only you and Mr. H., but all my Christian friends, and even
I myself through grace, shall one day be partakers of it. The
way and means we know. "If anyone, says Christ, will
come after me (to glory) let him renounce himself." i.e., make
his own will no principle of action, be no self-pleaser, "and take
up his cross" patiently (whether of sickness or outward circum-
stances, &c.) "and then let him follow me," follow me in a way
of duty here, and he shall follow me to glory hereafter. May
we all be such followers of the blessed Jesus! And why should
we despair of becoming such? What is there in Christ's
doctrine or example but that we may all, through the assistance
of the Holy Spirit, imitate him in? Suppose it does oblige us
to be a little stricter than our neighbors? Suppose it does
forbid us spending too much time in the seemingly-innocent
entertainments of the age? Suppose it does command us to
be constant and frequent in prayer, in watchings, fastings, and
other acts of mortification? Suppose it does bid us not to in-
dulge our unruly passions; but to learn of Christ to be meek,
patient, and lowly? Suppose it does compel us to redeem our
time, to fill up every day with proper duty and devotion?
Yet, what in all this, that is terrible? Has not such a behavi-
our a natural tendency to make us calm, easy, peaceful, happy?
And then, why should we refuse so easy a yoke, so light a
burden? I am sure the little (alas! too, too little) time I have
drawn in it, I have found it not galling but healing, and the
longer I bear it, the easier and pleasanter it is. Let us then,
Dear Mrs. H., cheerfully take it upon us, and then
No mortal living of us all can miss
A permanent, a sure substantial bliss.
Your sincere, though very unworthy friend
and humble servant,
G. W.
LETTER XVIII.
Dear Sir, Oxon, Oct. 14, 1736.
I Was agreeably detained, as you were pleased to term it,
last Tuesday, in reading your kind letter, and had I not
been assisted by the grace of God to receive everything with
an equal, undisturbed mind, perhaps the contents of it might
have given me some small uneasiness. But religion quite
changes the nature of man, and makes us receive all the
dispensations of providence with resignation and thankfulness.
Of this, dearest Sir, I hope you have had an experimental proof,
in bearing up with courage and resolution under those acute
pains the Almighty was pleased to visit you with last Sunday,
and with which, perhaps, His infinite wisdom and goodness
may continue to visit you longer. My dear friend (if I mistake
not) used to say, he was afraid God did not love him, because
he did not chasten him. Behold then, now the hand of the
Lord is upon you, not so much to punish, as to purify your
soul. Not in anger but in love. Pray therefore in your easy
intervals, that you may know, wherefore the Lord contends
with you, and that you may not come cankered out of the
furnace of affliction. Offer up every groan, every sigh, in
the name of your dying, risen Redeemer, and doubt not, but
they will be as prevalent as set times of prayer. Our being
enabled to pray when sickness comes on us, doubtless, is to
teach us the necessity of praying always, when we are in health.
But, dear Mr. H., wants no such lessons, or excitements, I
believe, to prayer. Methinks I could bear some of your pain
for you, if that would give you comfort. But as it is im-
possible, O let me never cease most earnestly to beseech my
heavenly Father, that He would sanctify this His fatherly
correction to you, and that the sense of your weakness may
add strength to your faith, and seriousness to your repentance.
Poor Mr. Pauncefoot, I find, is visited in a far more grievous
manner, poor good man, surely the time of his dissolution
(I should say of his coronation) draweth near. See, dear Mr. H.,
through what tribulations we must enter into glory. Be
pleased to give my hearty love and thanks to him for his last
kind letter. Beg him not to cease praying for me, unworthy
as I am. And, I hope, I shall not be wanting in returning
his kindness in the same manner. But alas, I have nothing
to depend on, but the merits of a crucified Redeemer to
have my poor petitions answered. But does dear Mrs. H.,
complain of deadness and coldness in devotion? Alas poor
woman! let her not be disheartened. This is a complaint,
which all the children of God have made. And we must
take a great deal of pains with our hearts, must pray often
and long, before we shall be able to pray well. And the
only way I can think of, to shame ourselves out of deadness in
prayer, is to censure and condemn, to humble and bewail our-
selves for it every time we go upon our knees, at least every
time we solemnly retire to converse with God. But why does
dear Mrs. H. so much as think of omitting but once the
receiving of the holy sacrament? Or if Satan does put such
thoughts in her head, why does not she repel them with
the utmost abhorrence? Alas! should the devil gain his
point here, would not the ridiculing world say, Mrs. H.,
began to build, but had not wherewith to finish. I have
seen too many fatal instances of the inexpressible danger and
sad consequences of leaving off any one means of grace,
not to encourage Mrs. H. steadfastly to persevere in the good
way she has begun; and would exhort her, in the name
of the Lord Jesus Christ, to labor daily to mortify
and subdue her corruptions, not wilfully to indulge herself
in any ill habit, custom, or temper, and then assure herself,
one time or another, Christ will be made known unto her in
breaking of bread. But what shall I say, dear Sir, about Mr.
W. &c., &c.? Alas! I find, they are all in the gall of bitterness,
in the very bondage of iniquity, and all I can do, is
to pity and pray for them. I find more and more, that where
true religion is wanting, there is confusion and every evil
work. But why is my honoured mother so solicitous about a
few paltry things, that will quickly perish? Why will she not
come and see her youngest son, who will endeavour to be a
Joseph to her, before she dies? What makes my dear friend
and his kind wife, give me another invitation to Gloucester?
Alas! have I not wearied and been expensive enough to you
already? I hope to send you, in a short time, two guineas to-
wards paying for Mr. Henry’s Exposition. I wish I could
spare more, but time will bring all things to pass. You see
what a large letter I have written to you to make amends
for the many short ones, I have sent lately. Though I be-
lieve you may say of mine, the quite contrary to what I say of
yours; the shorter the better. My due respects to all friends,
and believe me to be, in the utmost sincerity, Dearest Sir,
Your and Mrs. H.’s affectionate friend and humble servant,
G. W.
LETTER XIX.
Dear Sir, Oxon, Nov. 5, 1736
HEREWITH I have sent you seven pounds to pay for
Mr. Henry's Commentary. Dear Esq. Thorold recently
made me a present of ten guineas, so that now (forever blessed
be the divine goodness) I can send you more than I thought
for. In time, I hope to pay the apothecary's bill. If I for-
get your favors, I shall also forget my God. Say nothing
of your receiving this money, only give thanks, give hearty
thanks to our good and gracious God for his infinite, un-
merited mercy to me, the vilest of the sons of men. Oh, dear
Sir, may such instances of free grace strengthen your faith,
and make you put your sole trust and confidence in the Lord
your God. For he has said, I will never leave thee nor forsake
thee. Have not you experienced his loving-kindness and
mercy, in supporting you under your sickness? Methinks
I feel you have. May you experience it more and more! Did
not Christ give you the meeting last Sunday? I hope he did,
nay I am sure he did, if our hearts were duly prepared by
faith and repentance to receive him; but without an entire re-
signation of ourselves to God, and a thorough renunciation
of all worldly and corrupt affections, all God's ordinances will
profit nothing. Your reverend brother's kind letter I hope to
answer soon, and to send him also a small parcel of books. The
good Lord sanctify them to his own glory, and the good of
souls. I find dear Mr. Pauncefoot is still afflicted, but bid him
be of good cheer. In his latter end he may yet greatly in-
crease. When we are weak, then are we strong. There is
hope concerning his legacy. Let us in the meantime con-
tinue instant in prayer on behalf of this our dear and worthy
friend. Good man! Salute him kindly in my name. Beg his
prayers for my unworthy self, and tell him I will write as soon
as possible. The gospel flourishes at Oxford. Our society here,
blessed be God, goes on well. I received the papers and
thank you. How does dear Mrs. H.? The divine blessing rest
on you both. My prayer night and day is, that you may be
saved. Salute all friends by name. From Dearest Sir,
Your unworthy friend and humble servant,
G. W.
LETTER XX.
Dear Sir, Bristol, Feb. 10, 1737.
WHAT shall I say? I cannot be with you this
week. Methinks, it would be almost sinful to leave
Bristol at this critical juncture, there being now a prospect of
making a very considerable collection for the poor Americans.
The whole city seems to be alarmed. Churches are as full
on weekdays as they use to be on Sundays, and on Sundays so
full, that many, very many are obliged to go away, because
they cannot come in. Oh pray, dear Mr. H., that God
would always keep me humble, and fully convinced that I am
nothing without him, and that all the good which is done
upon earth, God does it himself. Quakers, Baptists, Presby-
terians, &c. all come to hear the word preached. Sanctify
it, Holy Father, to thy own glory and thy people's good! I
hope to be with you without fail on Tuesday morning. What
letters you have, please send to, Dear Sir,
Your unworthy friend, &c.
G. W.
LETTER XXI.
Dear Sir, Stonehouse, April 26, 1737.
BE pleased to send the Poor Country Curate, and Flavel’s
Husbandry Spiritualized. I know not what to do for
want of a clock in the house. How shall I know how my
precious time passes away? You'll mind your promise to come.
Here are lovely, solitary, and pleasant walks to commune
with your own heart, and search out your spirit. Has
Mr. Pauncefoot written to me? My dear friend Stratford's
death affects me still. Methinks I long to be above, employed
as he is. But alas, I am not ripe for glory; if I was, my
heavenly Father would gather me into his garner. Farewell,
dear Sir; remember I am alone, and pray accordingly for
Your sincere, though weak friend,
G. W.
LETTER XXII.
Dear Sir, Stonehouse, May 4, 1737.
WHY does not Mr. H. let me hear from or see him?
Surely no evil has befallen either him or his family
in their way to eternity. Why then tarry their horses? Why
are they so long in coming to visit the country, which now
looks like a second paradise, and which, to me, seems the
pleasantest place I ever was in, through all my life? Surely
I can never be thankful enough for being sent hither; people
flock to hear the word of God from the neighbouring villages,
as well as our own. They gladly receive me into their houses,
and I have no let or hindrance to my ministerial business; and
what is still better, God has opened my heart, and enabled me
to finish a sermon on "Remember thy Creator, &c."—If
you will come on Sunday you may hear it perhaps. — Your
sister-in-law talks of being here again on Friday, but I be-
lieve it will be more agreeable if you choose another oppor-
tunity, that we may have our own conversation. I hope that
dear Mrs. H. took nothing ill, that was in my last. I
meant it well, and wrapped up the pill in as much sugar as I
could. My hearty love to her and Miss J. Poor Mr. A.
and Mr. W. will set out tomorrow, I suppose. The Lord
prosper them and be with them wherever they go, and
make them good soldiers of Jesus Christ, and finally bring
them and us to His heavenly kingdom! So wishes, so prays,
Yours affectionately,
G. W.
LETTER XXIII.
Dear Sir, Bristol, May 11, 1737.
I Thank you for your last, and bless God that you got
home safe: your observations on the weather were per-
tinent and spiritual. Honest James and I were out in the
midst of the lightning, and never were more delighted in our
lives. May we be as well pleased when the Son of God
comes to judgment. What! no news from your brother?
Well, Stonehouse people and I agree better and better. I
believe we shall part weeping. Had I time I would now write
to Miss T., but I must away among my flock, and so deny myself
that pleasure till another opportunity is given to. Dear Sir,
Your sincere friend and humble servant,
G. W.
LETTER XXIV.
Dear Sir, Bristol, May 24, 1737.
BY the particular good providence of God, I got safe to
Bristol yesterday by ten in the morning, and was re-
ceived (unworthy as I am) with the utmost civility and kind-
ness. I have learnt from hence the benefit of setting out on
our journey to eternity betimes, and what a pleasing reflec-
tion it will be to look back, though not to depend, on one’s
past life, and find a great deal of work done in a little time.
The people here are exceedingly kindly affected towards me;
and, I hope, I have seen the effects of my doctrine in the
reformation of some of their lives. Remember me always in
your prayers. Accept my hearty thanks for all favours, and
believe me to be,
Ever yours,
G. W.
LETTER XXV.
Dear Mrs. H., Oxon, July 14, 1737.
IF you remember, I promised you a long and particular
letter when I was at Gloucester, and nothing hinders but
I may now perform it. Permit me then first, to begin this,
as I would all my letters, with thanks to you and kind Mr.
H. for your inexpressible favours conferred on the most un-
worthy of my master's servants; and, withal, to assure you,
how incessantly I pray, that the God of all grace and mercy,
for the sake of his dear Son Jesus Christ, would reward
you in spirituals, for what you have done to me in temporals,
and feed your soul with his heavenly graces, as plentifully as
you have fed my body with nourishing food. But as, in all
probability, this will be the last letter I shall write to dear Mrs.
H. before I sail, what can I fill the remainder with better, than
by exhorting you, to lay aside every weight, particularly the
sin that does most easily beset you, and so run with patience
the race set before you. I say, the sin that most easily
besets; for unless we lay the ax to the root, unless we sin-
cerely resolve in the strength of Jesus Christ to subdue our
favourite, our darling passion, and spare not one Agag, though
ever so engaging, ever so beautiful, all our other sacrifices
will avail us nothing. Suppose therefore, for instance, Passion
be our greatest foible. A sincere person will never cease
night or day, till he is made meek and lowly in heart. But if
it be asked, how he shall do this? I answer, first, let him con-
sider how odious it is in the sight of God, and how con-
trary to the lamb-like meekness of the holy Jesus. Secondly,
Let him reflect how troublesome it must be to others,
(for alas what unnecessary disorders, what needless troubles
doth the passionate person occasion to all that are round about
him?) Thirdly, Let him consider how exceeding hurtful and
unpleasant it is to himself; how it ruffles and discomposes his
mind; unfits him for every holy duty, and in short makes him
a torment to himself and a burden to others. Well, after he
has thus seen the deformity of his darling passion, the next en-
quiry must be, how to get the mastery over it. The first and
grand thing, is to get a true and lively faith in Christ Jesus,
seeking for it by earnest prayer. To this, we must have re-
course in all our struggles; for it's God alone, who can sub-
due and govern the unruly wills of sinful men, and it is his
grace which alone can enable us to mortify our corrupt pas-
sions. But then we must take care not to rest in general
petitions for conquering this or that corruption; but must
descend to particulars. For instance, supposing I am angry
with a servant or husband without a cause; What must I do?
Why, take the very first opportunity of retiring from the
world, and after having bewailed my being angry, earnestly
beseech the Lord of all power and might to enable me to
withstand such and such a provocation for the future, and not-
withstanding I should fail again and again in the very same
instance, yet I would again and again renew my petitions
to the throne of grace, and never cease praying and striving,
till instead of a blind, perverse, troublesome passion, I had the
lovely, calm, and delightful grace of meekness and humility
planted in its room. Now would dear Mrs. H. take some
such method as this (for I suppose by this time, she guesses
to whom all this points) I dare say, she would quickly find as
much difference in herself as there is between a wise man
and an idiot.—And that she may both begin and succeed in
this method, is the earnest prayer of, Dear Mrs. H.,
Your affectionate friend, &c.
G. W.
LETTER XXVI.
My Dear Friend, London, Sept. 28, 1737.
I Thank you for your last kind letter and kinder wishes.
May they be turned into prayers, and heard at the throne
of grace. Blessed be God for your new correspondence with
our Oxford friends. I hope you will be instrumental to build
each other up in the knowledge and fear of our Lord and
Saviour Jesus Christ. God still works powerfully here.
People flock more than ever, and show the sincerity of their
hearts by giving liberally to the poor. I have preached four
charity sermons within this little while, and the collections
were larger than ever were known. Not unto me, O Lord,
not unto me; but unto thy Name be the glory and praise there-
of! I am glad, since it's the divine will, that my brother is
coming up, though my ability as to temporals you know
is small. But I have an all-sufficient God to apply to in
all emergencies. I am sorry still for my brother's loss; but I
fear he must have greater, before he is awakened out of his
spiritual lethargy. God sanctify all his dispensations to him.
I know not why we go not to Georgia; but there is no like-
lihood of it yet, as I see. Friends universally dissuade me
from going by myself; but I hope it will not be long now,
before we shall launch into the deep. Tonight I preach
again at Bow church, before the religious societies. God
opens my heart to compose freely. O praise him, dear Mr.
H., for this and all his other mercies, conferred on, Dear Sir,
Your and Mrs. H’s affectionate friend,
G. W
LETTER XXVII.
Dear Sir, London, Oct. 25, 1737.
MULTIPLICITY of business prevented my writing
to you before. But though you have not heard from
me by letter, yet you may assure yourself, dear Sir, I never
forget mentioning you in my prayers. God knows that I
and some other friends intercede most fervently for you, and
very frequently even at midnight. May God, for Christ's
sake, hear and answer them! We sail not for Georgia this
month. I suppose you have heard of my mighty deeds, falsely
so called, by reading the newspapers; for I find some back-
friend has published abroad my preaching four times in a
day; but I beseech Mr. Raikes, the printer, never to put me
into his news upon any such account again, for it is quite
contrary to my inclinations and positive orders. God still
works here. The collections for the charity schools, in all the
churches where I preach, are very large. All London is
alarmed. Many youths here sincerely love our Lord Jesus
Christ; and thousands, I hope, are quickened, strengthened,
and confirmed by the word preached. I was never in better
health, and never composed more freely. O praise the Lord,
dear Sir, and pray that I may not be self-sufficient but humble.
I am glad dear Mrs. H. is recovered. May she, with
Peter’s wife's mother, arise and minister to Jesus Christ.
God reward her for all her works and labors of love. Blessed
be God my hands are full of business. A third edition of
my sermon on regeneration is coming out. Write to me
quickly, accept my hearty thanks and love, and expect to
hear again from, Dear Sir,
Ever yours,
G. W.
LETTER XXVIII.
I Heartily thank you for your last, and having a few mo-
ments, sit down to answer it. Let not my friends trouble
me with temporal offers, I shall accept (God assisting me)
of no place this side Jordan. We embark for Georgia in
about three weeks or a month at farthest. You wish me
good luck in the name of the Lord. I hope to send to
you again before I sail. Mr. M. is going amongst
the colliers again at Bristol, and a church, I hope, will be
built for them. Prosper, O Lord, the work of his hands
upon him!—Mrs. Farmer, whenever my circumstances will
admit, shall be paid all that is due to her on my mother's ac-
count. GOD still works more and more by my unworthy
ministry. Last week, save one, I preached ten times in dif-
ferent churches; and the last week seven; and yesterday
four times, and read prayers twice, though I slept not above
an hour the night before, which was spent in religious con-
versation, and in interceding for you, Mrs. H., good Mr.
Pauncefoot, &c. I now begin to preach charity sermons twice
or thrice a week, besides two or three on Sundays, and sixty
or seventy pounds are collected weekly for the poor children.
Thousands would come in to hear, but cannot. This night
I preached a funeral sermon before a most crowded audience,
and God, I believe, worked upon the people's hearts. O
pray for me still, dear Sir, that I may renew my strength,
that I may walk and not be weary, run and not be faint.
Admire God's free grace in Christ Jesus, and let his
goodness to me, the worst of sinners, strengthen your faith, and
make you never to despair of mercy. Farewell. My love to all,
and am, Dear Sir, in sincerity,
Your friend, &c.
G. W.
LETTER XXX.
Dear Sir, Margate, Jan. 9, 1738.
HITHER the good providence of God has safely brought
us; our ship cast anchor near this town, and my
dear fellow-traveler and I came on shore (to our great com-
fort) to buy some things we wanted. We have been most
courteously treated by the curate of the place, and had some
Christian conversation. The winds and storms are blustering
about our ears, and teaching us lessons of obedience to Him,
whom winds and storms obey. God give us grace to
learn them. Mr. B. can inform you what other particulars
have happened to us since we left you; I need only add, that
the divine goodness attends us wherever we go. Oh dear
Sir! who would but leave their few ragged, tattered nets
to follow Jesus Christ? Who would but follow the Lamb
wherever He shall be pleased to lead? Pray, dear Sir, that
I may always do so, and then, I am sure, God will never
leave or forsake me. You see, dear Sir, I have answered your
kind letter much sooner than expectation, in order to express
how sincerely I value your friendship, though you differ from
me in some outward modes. Indeed, Sir, I hope the favors
I have received from you and others of your Christian brethren
will never go out of my mind; but I shall often plead them
(as I have done already) at the throne of grace. I would will-
ingly be of so catholic a spirit, as to love the image of my di-
vine master, wherever I see it: I am far from thinking God's
grace is confined to any set of men whatsoever: no, I know
the partition-wall is now broken down, and that Jesus
Christ came to redeem people out of all nations and lan-
guages and tongues; and therefore his benefits are not to be
confined to this or that particular set of professors. I only
wish, that I may have grace given me to preach the truth, as
it is in Jesus; and then, come what will, I hope I shall (as
I do, blessed be God) rejoice.
You know, Sir, what a design I am going upon, and what
a stripling I am for so great a work; but I stand forth as
David against Goliath in the name of the Lord of Hosts, and
I doubt not, but He that has and doth, will still deliver unto
the end. God give me a deep humility, a well-guided zeal,
a burning love, and a single eye, and then let men or devils
do their worst—Dear Sir, I could write more, but nature
calls for rest. Be pleased to give my hearty love to all you
and I know, and acquaint them, how safe I am here; for
otherwise the tempestuous night might put them and others in
pain for, Dear Sir,
Your unworthy, though affectionate friend,
G. W.
Dear Mrs. H., London, Dec. 23, 1737.
ONCE more I send you a line. Nothing but an excess
of business, should have prevented me writing to you
oftener. Your favors, I hope, will never be forgotten, and
never cease to be mentioned before the throne of grace.
God only knows how earnestly I have recommended you
and yours to His never-failing mercy. On Wednesday night
eighteen of us continued all night in praises, and praying for
you and our other friends. I know, that passion is the sin,
which most easily besets you, and therefore I always pray
that you may have grace given you to conquer it, and to
learn of Jesus Christ to be meek and lowly in heart.
Then, and not till then, you will find rest to your soul.
Pardon me, dear Mrs. H., for being thus free. Your kindness
compels me to it. Had I not a sincere regard for you, I
should not express myself thus. Besides, it's the last time,
perhaps, I shall write to you in this world, and therefore would
have this letter contain some instructive hints. We sail, God
willing, next week. Great things have been done for us here.
Perhaps upwards of a thousand pounds have been collected for
the poor, and the charity schools, and I have preached above
a hundred times, since I have been here. A visible altera-
tion is made also in hundreds. Last Sunday at six in the morning,
when I gave my farewell, the whole church was
drowned in tears; they wept and cried aloud, as a mother
weeps for her firstborn. Since that, there is no end of per-
sons coming and weeping, telling me what God has done for
their souls: others again beg little books, and desire me to write
their names in them. The time would fail me, was I to relate
how many have been awakened, and how many pray for me.
The great day will discover all. In the meanwhile, I be-
seech you Mrs. H., by the mercies of God to pray, that the
goodness of God may make me humble. As yet the divine
strength has been magnified in my weakness. Many have
opposed, but in vain. God's power conquers all. I am
now going as Abraham did, not knowing whither I go;
but I commit myself to the guidance of God's good pro-
vidence and spirit. He that has and doth, will deliver me
out of all my troubles. I only wish I could debase myself low
enough, that I might be more fitted for the high and lofty
one who inhabits eternity, to work by. I am a proud,
imperious, sinful worm; but God, I hope, in time, will con-
form me to the image of His dear Son. He has begun (for
ever adored be His free grace), and I trust, He will finish
his good work in me. Out of the money that God has sent
me, I will pay all the debts I can. I have sent some of it to
Mrs. Wells, with particular orders how to be disposed of;
two guineas are for Mrs. Farmer towards the debt due to her
from my mother. My farewell sermon will be published
shortly, with two or three more. Dear Mrs. H., farewell.
God reward you and yours for all your works of faith and
labors of love, and grant we may so believe, and so live here,
as to meet in eternal glory hereafter,
Ever yours,
G. W.
LETTER XXX.
Dear Sir, Margate, Jan. 9, 1738.
HITHER the good providence of God has safely brought
us; our ship cast anchor near this town, and my
dear fellow-traveler and I came on shore (to our great com-
fort) to buy some things we wanted. We have been most
courteously treated by the curate of the place, and had some
Christian conversation. The winds and storms are blustering
about our ears, and teaching us lessons of obedience to Him,
whom winds and storms obey. God give us grace to
learn them. Mr. B. can inform you what other particulars
have happened to us since we left you; I need only add, that
the divine goodness attends us wherever we go. Oh dear
Sir! who would but leave their few ragged, tattered nets
to follow Jesus Christ? Who would but follow the Lamb
wherever He shall be pleased to lead? Pray, dear Sir, that
I may always do so, and then, I am sure, God will never
leave or forsake me. You see, dear Sir, I have answered your
kind letter much sooner than expectation, in order to express
how sincerely I value your friendship, though you differ from
me in some outward modes. Indeed, Sir, I hope the favours
I have received from you and others of your Christian brethren
will never go out of my mind; but I shall often plead them
(as I have done already) at the throne of grace. I would will-
ingly be of so catholic a spirit, as to love the image of my di-
vine master, wherever I see it: I am far from thinking God's
grace is confined to any set of men whatsoever: no, I know
the partition-wall is now broken down, and that Jesus
Christ came to redeem people out of all nations and lan-
guages and tongues; and therefore his benefits are not to be
confined to this or that particular set of professors. I only
wish, that I may have grace given me to preach the truth, as
it is in Jesus; and then, come what will, I hope I shall (as
I do, blessed be God) rejoice.
You know, Sir, what a design I am going upon, and what
a stripling I am for so great a work; but I stand forth as
David against Goliath in the name of the Lord of Hosts, and
I doubt not, but He that has and doth, will still deliver unto
the end. God give me a deep humility, a well-guided zeal,
a burning love, and a single eye, and then let men or devils
do their worst—Dear Sir, I could write more, but nature
calls for rest. Be pleased to give my hearty love to all you
and I know, and acquaint them, how safe I am here; for
otherwise the tempestuous night might put them and others in
pain for, Dear Sir,
Your unworthy, though affectionate friend,
G. W.
LETTER XXXI.
Dear Mrs. H., Deal, Jan. 11, 1738.
HITHER has God safely brought us. Pray give thanks
on my behalf. We have had two little storms, the
one we escaped by being at Margate, the other we were
enabled to bear manfully, and to pray for you and yours
on the open deck in the midst of it. All the officers are ex-
ceedingly civil. The captain gives me the free use of his
cabin, and some impression is made on the soldiers. I read
prayers and preach twice every day, and, would you think it,
the very soldiers stand out to say their catechism. Oh that
they may be soldiers of Jesus Christ. God gives me
great joy, and excites me to adore Him more and more, when
I behold His wonders in the deep. I am but a fresh-water
sailor; but God's strength will be magnified in my weak-
ness, and I verily believe we shall arrive at the haven, where we
would be. Oh that we may all so pass through the waves of
this troublesome world, that at last we may arrive at the port
of everlasting rest! Expect to hear from me at Gibraltar, and
assure yourself your favors shall never be forgotten by
Your sincere friend,
G. W.
LETTER XXXII.
To Mr. Deal, Jan. 21, 1738.
SUPPOSE I answer dear Mr. before I reach Georgia,
"Will he be angry?" I fancy not. I had a mind to write
to you again, before I received yours. For as you have been
so liberal in your presents, it would be unpardonable in me,
was I niggardly in my letters. No, my dear friend, I hope
I never shall cease praying for you and yours, so long as I
live. Hitherto I have not. I was praying for you just as I
received yours; I am glad to hear you prayed before you
wrote to me. Surely God will bless such a correspondence.
O my friend, let us still wrestle with God, that we may lie
steadfast, unmovable, always abounding in the work of the
Lord. For it is perseverance that crowns our labours. He, and
He only, can be saved. The world, the flesh, and the devil are
three such potent enemies, that we must strive, we must per-
severe, if we will gain a conquest. Strive then; let us, my
dear friend, strive as persons striving for eternity. Let us
abstain from all appearance of evil, and avoid all company
that does not directly tend to promoting our spiritual
welfare. Whether one of the societies you frequent, my dear
friend, has a tendency that way, I leave you to judge. I
think I have heard you say, it keeps you from family and se-
cret prayer. If that is not a sufficient reason for absenting from
it, I'll say no more. I believe you to be sincere, and
therefore, if you consult God by prayer and reading His
word, your way will be made clear before you. I only add,
that I could wish, instead of frequenting that, you would set
up another society of a quite contrary nature on the same
night of the week. I know Mr. had such a design on
foot, and desired me to mention it. I wish you good success
in this and every pious undertaking in the name of the
Lord. May God reward you for all your kindnesses, and
make you to abound in every good word and work! May you
walk by faith and not by sight; and though you are in the world,
may you not be of it! I preach here, God willing, tomorrow;
there's likely to be a great congregation. O pray, that they
may not be sent away empty, but converted by, dear Mr.,
Your affectionate friend,
G. W.
LETTER XXXIII.
Dear Sir, Deal, Jan. 25, 1738.
I am ashamed of my ingratitude in not writing to you be-
fore, but you'll not wonder I am ungrateful to my
friends when I tell you I am ungrateful to my God. How-
ever, as I always remarked you for your charity, I know you
will imitate Him you so resemble, and upon my promise of
amendment for the future, will pardon what is past. Oh
dear Sir, how shall I express my gratitude to dear —? But
above all, what return shall I make to my ever-blessed Re-
deemer for all the favours he has bestowed upon me? Help,
I entreat you, help me to be thankful, and as you abound in
prayer, abound in praises. I find my heart too backward
to this divine exercise. I am ready enough to ask for mercies,
but alas! how slow to return thanks! Indeed, sometimes God
touches me from above, and my heart, hard as it is, is melted
down and quite overcome with the sense of his free grace in
Christ Jesus towards me. But I want always to go on
my way rejoicing; I want the heart of a seraphim;
I want to sing as loud as they,
Who shine above in endless day,
I could almost say more than they, and why should I not re-
turn angelic thanks? But my heart is as yet unhumbled, I
see not what I am, what I deserve, and therefore set not a
due value on the divine mercies. Pray therefore, dear Mr.,
that I may receive my sight, that my eyes may be opened,
and that seeing what God has done for me, I may break
out into songs of praise, and by such heart-transforming
divine exercises be gradually trained up for eternal uninter-
rupted communion with that heavenly choir, who cease not
chanting forth day and night hallelujahs to Him that sitteth
upon the throne and to the Lamb forever. Dear Mr. —, I can
relate to you fresh matter for praise and thanksgiving; a di-
vine fire seems to be kindling in Deal. I preached on Sun-
day, and this day. The inhabitants are quite affectionate, and
so desirous to hear the word, at my private lodgings, as well
as at public churches, that I am obliged to divide them into
two companies. And God, blessed be his free grace in
Christ Jesus, helps me through. I suppose my dear friend
has heard how affairs go on shipboard. I need only add,
that God makes his power to be known among those that sail
with me, and there are great hopes of the captain's conver-
sion. O pray, that he may not be an almost, but an altogether
Christian. Dear Mr., farewell. It's late, and many other friends
must have a line to-night. May God reward you for all kind-
nesses, and keep you steadfast unto the end. Pray return my
hearty thanks to all your brethren; tell them I sincerely pray
for their growth and perseverance in holiness, and am, dear Mr.,
Your affectionate, though unworthy friend
and servant in Christ Jesus,
G. W.
LETTER XXXIV.
Dear Mr., Gibraltar Harbour, Feb. 24, 1738.
I bless God for inclining your heart to take my advice. I
know it was intended well, and I hope it proceeded from
the Spirit of God. The many fatal consequences I have
daily seen, proceeding from conversing with lukewarm
Christians, makes me jealous of my dear friends, lest they
should be infected by them; and the great tendency I find in
my own heart to catch every infection, makes me resolve
for myself, and to put others on resolving to keep no set
company but with religious persons. I hope by this time I
may wish you joy of setting a new society with Messrs.;
and I doubt not but your hearts have already burned within
you, while you talked to one another of the scriptures of
truth. I am sure there is scarcely a night has passed over my
head but I have wrestled with God for you, and prayed
that He would prosper this work of your hands upon you. My
hearty desire and daily petition at the throne of grace is, that
you may be saved; and though I know not much of your dear
wife's temper, yet I pray, that she may be meek and lowly
in heart, not easily provoked, nor answer unnecessarily again.
I pray, that you both may walk as Zechariah and Elizabeth did
before the Lord blameless, that you may love one another,
as Christ and the church, and see your children like olive-
branches round about your table. I pray, that you may per-
severe in the good way you have begun, that you may ab-
stain from all appearance of evil, and dare to be exemplarily
good. I pray, that you may practice universal self-denial,
and perfect holiness in the fear of God. I could say much
more, but must away to Gibraltar; one of the Majors of the
regiments has sent for me, having provided a lodging at a mer-
chant's house unknown to me. Oh, admire God's goodness!
Accept my thanks and love, and believe me to be, more than
words can express,
Your affectionate friend in Christ,
G. W.
LETTER XXXV.
Dear Mr., Gibraltar, Feb. 25, 1738.
I should think myself unworthy of your friendship, did I
not send you a line now God has brought me in safety
hither. I know you will give thanks, and therefore, God
forbid I should sin against the Lord in not informing you
of it. —Your prayers have already been heard; for God (ever
adored be His free grace in Christ Jesus) hath been with
us of a truth. He hath led us through the sea, as through a
wilderness, and brought us to a haven, where I am honoured
with many honours.—Any one that knows Gibraltar would
be apt to say, "Can any good come out from thence?" Yes, I
assure you, there may; for there are some that are not ashamed
of the gospel of Christ. About six o'clock this morning I
went to the church, where was assembled a number of decent
soldiers praying and singing psalms to Christ as God. They
meet constantly three times a day, and I intend, God willing,
henceforward to meet them. For my delight is in the saints
who are in the earth, and those that excel in virtue. I have
talked with some of them, and, blessed be God, can find the
marks of the new birth in them. They pray without ceasing,
have overcome the world, hate sin, as sin, love their enemies
and one another. They glory in the cross of Christ, and
rejoice that they are accounted worthy to suffer shame for the
sake of Christ. O, who would but travel to see how the
spirit of God is moving on the faces of poor sinners' souls up,
and down the world! God, I find, has a people everywhere;
Christ has a flock, though but a little flock, in all places.
God be praised, that we are of this flock, and that it will be
our Father's good pleasure to give us the kingdom! Gibraltar
is blessed with a governor, who has not absented himself from
public worship, unless when he was sick, for these seven years,
and yet is very moderate towards the dissenters. Both con-
formists and nonconformists perform public worship, though at
different times of the day, in the same place: They also have
a religious society. The good Lord prosper this work of
their hands upon them. Whenever we go away, may we
leave a blessing behind us. He is a prayer-hearing God.—
Yesterday a major of one of the regiments, unknown to me,
took two handsome rooms, and sent for me from on board,
desiring me to lodge in them; and I find the people of the
house fear God.—"When I sent you without scrip or shoe,
lacked you anything?" said our Lord. They said nothing,
—O, dear Mr., I beseech you abound in thanksgiving,
and pray that all these blessings may humble my proud heart,
and make me willing to follow the Lamb whithersoever He shall
lead me. Assure yourself, that you and all your Christian friends
are constantly prayed for by, dear Sir,
Yours most affectionately in the Lord Jesus,
G. W.
LETTER XXXVI.
Dear Sir, Gibraltar, Feb. 27, 1738.
Ever since I left Gravesend, I remember the fullness of
your heart. I have been a constant petitioner at the
throne of grace for you, and intended writing to you before,
but was let hitherto. However, God has now brought me
safe to Gibraltar, and as I have time, I should think myself in-
excusable, did I not send a line to dear Mr., to assure
him, I forgot not his tears, and wish him to be not only an
almost, but an altogether Christian. Dear Sir, you are young
and in the bloom of youth, and it would rejoice my heart to
see you triumph over the lust of the eye, the lust of the flesh,
and the pride of life, and to become a poor despised servant of
Jesus Christ. Others, indeed, may wish you wealth, may
wish you pomp and grandeur; but believe me, my dear friend,
these will not, these cannot, make you happy: No, nothing
but God can satisfy the heart of man; nothing but an assur-
ance, that we are born again, that we are members of Christ,
that we are united to him by one and the same spirit with
which he himself was actuated. Without this, if we were to
have our appetites regaled with the richest dainties, be
clothed with purple and fine linen, and fare sumptuously every
day, yet the hand-writing upon the wall, the consideration,
that all these things are quickly to be taken away, would make
our visage to change, and our knees, like Belshazzar's, to smite
one against another. Strive then, my dear friend, to get the
spirit of Christ, who will keep close to you, when all other
comforts fail; will make you happy here, and unspeakably
happy hereafter. —Never fear the contempt you will meet with;
yet a little while, and they that call you fool, will call them-
selves so, and curse that worldly wisdom, which tempted them
to evade the cross of Christ. Strange! that anyone should
let a little reproach deprive them of an eternal crown! Lord,
what is man! How blind as to the knowledge of his true in-
terest! How backward in the pursuit of his eternal good! O,
dear Mr. ---, let us not be of the number of those, who
desire the honour that comes from man; but be content with
that which comes from God. In a short time, we shall have
praise enough, Heaven will echo with the applause that shall
be given to the true followers of the Lamb, and then you will
see how sincerely I was, dear Sir,
Your affectionate friend and servant,
G. W.
LETTER XXXVII.
Dear Mrs. H., At Sea, April 14, 1738.
Though through excess of business, and the short-
ness of the time that was allotted me, I wrote but a few
lines to you from Gibraltar, yet, what hinders but that I
may send you a longer letter now? It's true we are now nearly
a thousand miles from Georgia, but as I shall have an oppor-
tunity of sending immediately on our arrival, I choose to take
time by the forelock, and embrace the first opportunity of ac-
knowledging my obligations to dear Mrs. H. and her husband;
for whom I pray without ceasing. Your past favours are sel-
dom out of my mind; I plead them daily before God in
prayer, and hope, if it is ever in my power, I shall imitate the
example of pious David in yesterday evening's first lesson, and
requite my friends, particularly dear Mrs. H. and her spouse,
for the kindnesses they have shown me. However, supposing
this should not happen, they will in no wise lose their re-
ward. But I know you do not care I should dwell on this,
you want to be informed, how God has dealt with me since I
left Gibraltar. Exceedingly graciously indeed. He has com-
forted me on every occasion, most remarkably blessed my un-
worthy ministry on board the ship, sent us most delightful
weather, and made us to ride as it were on the wings of the
wind. We live in perfect love and harmony one with ano-
ther. I know but little difference between sea and land, and
have great reason to bless God for sending me abroad. A
grievous sickness has been sent among us, by which most of
the ship have been chastened and corrected but only two
given over unto death; and God hath been so good to me,
that, except for a little time after we sailed from Gibraltar, I
have been in perfect health, and now God satisfies my mouth
with good things, making me strong and lively as a young eagle.
I have nothing to disturb my joy in God, but the disorder of my
passions. Were these once brought into a proper subjection to
divine grace, O well would it be with me, and happy should
I be. But so long as I am angry for trifles, and throw myself
into needless disorders, so long must my heart be like the
troubled sea, so long consequently must I be unhappy. Pray
therefore, dear Mrs. H., that I may lay the ax of mortification
to the root of my most darling corruptions, and since I have
but little, if anything, to disturb me without, O pray that I
may meet with no disturbance from myself within. The far-
ther particulars of my voyage, you will see in my journal,
which I have sent to Mr. Huston, and for the blessings con-
tained therein, I beseech you to return God most humble and
hearty thanks. About Christmas next, God willing, I pur-
pose to come to England to take priest's orders, and to return
as soon as possible to Georgia. In the meantime, dear Mrs.
H., let us strive to enter in at the strait gate, that we may be
Christians indeed, and know what it is truly to be born again
from above, and to be renewed by the spirit in our minds.
Remember me most affectionately to all friends. I am,
Yours, &c.,
G. W.
LETTER XXXVIII.
Dear Mr. __, On board the Whitaker, April 17, 1738.
To assure you I do not forget you, I write to you, as yet,
eight hundred miles offshore. Your honest heart has
won my affections. I make mention of you and yours con-
tinually at the throne of grace in my prayers, and shall have
no greater pleasure than to hear you walk in the truth. In your
last, I think you said, you would desist from frequenting any
other societies, but what immediately tended to the promoting
of true religion, and ere now, I doubt not but you have seen
the benefit of it. I have often pleased myself with the hopes,
that you, dear Mr. __, had set up another society among
yourselves, and often have I thought, I felt the benefit of your
prayers; for God hath blessed me exceedingly, and brought
us on our way rejoicing; and has shown me, that he doth not
send me abroad in vain. —How God will deal with me at Sa-
vannah, I know not; however, let my friends be always lifting
up their hands in intercession, and then our spiritual Amalek
will not prevail. Hitherto I have been made to go on from
conquering to conquer. God gives me a cheerful spirit, and
crowns my feeble labours with success. And why should I
despair of future assistance? Are not these earnests of future
mercies? And may I not expect, when I am duly prepared,
to see greater things than these? Cry therefore mightily unto
the Lord, that I may be humble, and that I may tremble at
his word, and then he will delight to honour me. I live in
hopes of seeing you and your wife again (growing in grace) in
England. You told me, she desired I would draw her picture;
but alas! she has applied to an improper limner. However,
though I cannot describe what she is, I can tell what she ought
to be.—Meek, patient, long-suffering, obedient in all things,
not self-willed, not soon angry, no brawler, swift to hear, slow
to speak, and ready to every good word and work. But I can
no more, I dare not go on in telling another what she ought
to be, when I want so much myself; only this I know, when
possessed of those good qualities before-mentioned, she will
then be as happy as her heart can wish, and afford great reason
of thanksgiving to, dear Mr. __,
Your and Mrs. __'s affectionate friend,
G. W.
LETTER XXXIX.
My dear Friend, On board the Whitaker, May 6, 1738.
HOW goes time? I can scarce tell; for I have been some
time past, as one would think, launching into eternity.
God has been pleased graciously to visit me with a violent
fever, which he notwithstanding so sweetened by divine con-
solations, that I was enabled to rejoice and sing in the midst of
it. Indeed, I had many violent conflicts with the powers of
darkness, who did all they could to disturb and distract me;
but Jesus Christ prayed for me: And though I was once
reduced to the last extremity, and all supernatural assistance
seemed to be suspended for a while, and Satan as it were had
dominion over me, yet God suffered not my faith to fail; but
came in at length to my aid, rebuked the tempter, and from
that moment I grew better. Surely God is preparing me for
something extraordinary: For he has now sent me such ex-
traordinary conflicts and comforts as I never before experi-
enced. I was as I thought on the brink of eternity. I had
heaven within me; I thought of nothing in this world; I
earnestly desired to be dissolved and go to Christ; but God
was pleased to order it otherwise, and I am resigned, though
I can scarce be reconciled to come back again into this vale of
misery. I had the heavenly Canaan in full view, and hoped I
was going to take possession of it; but God saw I was not yet
ripe for glory, and therefore in mercy spared me, that I may
recover my spiritual strength before I go hence and am no
more seen. Oh pray, my dear friend, that I may not grow
lukewarm, or slothful, but arise from my late bed of sickness,
and administer with ten times more alacrity to my blessed
Master, than ever I did before. I would write more, but
my strength fails me. We hope to be at Savannah on
Monday.
Yours,
G. W.
LETTER XL.
Dearest Sir, Savannah, June 10, 1738.
ABOUT five weeks I have been at Savannah, where
providence seems to intend continuing me for some
time. God has graciously visited me with a fit of sickness;
but now I am lively as a young eagle. All things have hap-
pened better than expectation. America is not so horrid a place
as it is represented to be. The heat of the weather, lying
on the ground, &c., are mere painted lions in the way, and to a
soul filled with divine love not worth mentioning. The coun-
try, mornings and evenings, is exceedingly pleasant, and there
are uncommon improvements made (considering the indiffer-
ence of the soil) in divers places. With a little assistance the
country people would do very well. As for my ministerial office,
I can inform you, that God (such is his goodness) sets his seal
to it here, as at other places. We have an excellent Christian
school, and near a hundred constantly attend at evening
prayers. The people receive me gladly, as yet, into their
houses, and seem to be most kindly affected towards me. I
have a pretty little family, and find it possible to manage a house
without distraction. Provisions we do not want to feed on,
though we are cut off from all occasions to pamper our bodies.
Blessed be God, I visit from house to house, catechize, read
prayers twice and expound the two second lessons every day;
read to a houseful of people three times a week; expound the
two lessons at five in the morning, read prayers and preach
twice, and expound the catechism to servants, &c. at seven in
the evening every Sunday. What I have most at heart, is the
building an orphan-house, which I trust will be effected at my
return to England. In the meanwhile, I am settling little
schools in and about Savannah; that the rising generation may
be bred up in the nurture and admonition of the Lord. The
Lord prosper my weak endeavours for promoting his glory
and his people's good. Oh, dear Mr. H., pray for me. For
I do, indeed I do, pray for you and yours. Remember me to
dear Mrs. H. and exhort her to perfect holiness in the fear of
God. Remind Mr. W., (since he will not hearken
to me) to work out his salvation with fear and trembling,
and beg him to pray for, though he will not write to,
dear Mr. H.
Ever, ever yours,
G. W.
LETTER XLI.
Dear Mr. —, Kilrush, (Ireland) Nov. 16, 1738.
I have not forgotten you; and as a proof of it, I send you this to
acquaint you of my safe arrival here. I know you will re-
joice and give thanks, and pray that my coming to London may
be in the fullness of the blessing of the gospel of peace. God has
done for me more abundantly than I could dare ask or think.
The seed of the glorious gospel has taken root in the American
ground, and, I hope, will grow up into a great tree. By my
friends' prayers, I believe it has been planted. Oh, that they
may continue to water it with the same means, and then our
great God will give it an effective increase. —I hope to see
you in a few days at my old lodgings, and to rejoice with you
for what God has done for our souls. Indeed, I have felt
his power; I have tasted and known of a truth, that the Lord
is gracious! America, infant Georgia, is an excellent soil for Christianity;
you cannot live there without taking up a daily
cross. Therefore, I shall hasten back as soon as possible after
Christmas. Oh! that, in the meantime, I may be enabled to
be instant in season and out of season, and preach with de-
monstration of the spirit, and with power! Methinks I see
Mr. — lifting up his eyes towards heaven, and silently
saying, Amen.—I hope you will excuse Mr. Z.’s letter. I
have forgotten his house, though not his person and his love.
No, all your kindnesses, O my friends, are engraved upon my
heart, and I trust will never be forgotten by, dear Sir,
Your affectionate friend and humble servant,
G. W.
LETTER XLII.
My dear Friend, London, Dec. 30, 1738.
I am appointed by the trustees to be the minister of Savannah.
The Bishop of London (Doctor Gibson) has accepted the title,
and has granted me letters dismissory to any other bishop.
I have also met with Doctor Seeker, the Bishop of Oxford, who
informed me that our esteemed diocesan, the good Bishop Benson,
will perform the ordination two weeks from tomorrow in Oxford,
and he will provide me with the necessary letters dismissory.
God be praised; while aboard the ship, I prayed day and night
that, if it were His divine will, Bishop Benson, who ordained
me as a deacon, would now confer upon me the priesthood.
—And now my prayers have been answered.—Please meet with
his Lordship and ask him to specify when I need to be in Oxford
to receive the imposition of hands. Pray that I am properly
prepared for this sacred duty. It will be a month before I
can visit Gloucester again. I am eager to see you. I hold you
and your family dear in the love of Jesus Christ; however,
time is short, and I must end this letter.
Dear Sir,
Yours eternally,
G. W.
LETTER XLIII.
Dear Sir, London, Jan. 27, 1739.
IF I forget Mr. H. and his wife, may my right hand forget
her cunning. Excess of business alone was the cause of
my silence. I sleep but little, very little. Had I a thousand
hands, I could employ them all. I scarcely know what it is to
have an idle moment. It is late now. I have just been ex-
pounding. God fills me with His spirit, and I must redeem a
little time to write to dear Mr. H. Indeed, indeed I love you
in the bowels of Jesus Christ. O when shall I return
your past favours! I thank you for blessing God on my behalf.
I want a thousand tongues to praise Him. He still works by
me more and more. Subscriptions for erecting an orphan-
house come in apace. On Monday fortnight, God willing,
I set out for Bristol with Mr. Seward, and from thence propose
coming to Gloucester. Oh that it may be in the fullness of the
blessing of the gospel of peace! Mr. Howell Harris and I, are
correspondents, blessed be God! May I follow him, as he
does Jesus Christ. How he outstrips me! Fie upon
me, fie upon me. How does my brother? My love to him and
all, I long to see you and yours, and to give you repeated
assurances of my being, dear Sir,
Yours eternally,
G. W.
LETTER XLIV.
Dear Sir, Basingstoke, Feb. 8, 1739.
THOUGH I desired you to write first, yet the love I
bear you, will not suffer me to wait so long before you
hear from me. —Just now has God brought us to Basingstoke,
where I hope an effectual door will be opened before we leave
it, as well as at Windsor. —Oh my dear friend, more and more
do I see the benefit of confessing our blessed Lord before
men.—You have not been ashamed of the cross. —No, dear
Mr. has put his hand to the plough; he will not, surely
he cannot look back; but Jesus Christ alone can keep me
and my dear friend from falling. He has begun and he will
carry on, he will finish the good work in our souls. —We have
nothing to do, but to lay hold on him by faith, and to depend
on him for wisdom, righteousness, sanctification, and redemp-
tion. Not but we must be workers together with him; for a true
faith in Jesus Christ will not suffer us to be idle. —No, it is
an active, lively, restless principle; it fills the heart, so that it
cannot be easy, till it is doing something for Jesus Christ.
—Methinks I hear my dear friend crying out, "Lord, ever-
more give me this faith!" Believe me, I heartily say, Amen.
Ask then, my dear Sir, and it shall be given you, seek and strive
for it, and yet a little while and I shall see you a new creature;
your heart I hope is somewhat broken already.—All praise be
to God's free grace in Christ.—Go on, my dear friend, and
never cease till you know you are Christ's, by the spirit that
shall be given you. Never fear your carnal friends, renounce
them and everything else that stands in competition with your
duty to God.—What have we to do to know anyone after
the flesh: Let him, who does the will of our Father in heaven,
be our brother, our sister, our mother. For this reason I
subscribe myself, dear Sir,
Yours most affectionately in Christ,
G. W.
LETTER XLV.
Dear Mr. H___, Oxon., April 24, 1739.
BLESSED be God for working upon your heart by my
ministry. I hope the wished-for time will come, when
I shall see you full of faith and the Holy Ghost. Copies may
be taken of my letter; but I would not have it printed, be-
cause I intend, when retired from the world, to make some dis-
courses on the subject of free grace. Pray acquaint your mo-
ther, that I interceded for her solemnly last night. I besought
God, that she might have her Saviour revealed in her heart;
that is the only way to get above the fears of death. Christ
in us is the hope of glory. I rejoice to hear Mr. C. M. builds
you up in your most holy faith. I exhort you to go on, and
who knows but dear Mr. H. may, under God, keep up reli-
gion in Gloucester. Mr. Kinckle's conduct in searing the
church, and giving up the parsonage, has sadly grieved the
spirit of many good souls here; but I bless God they are
now a little comforted. Oh dear Mr. H—, my heart is drawn
towards London most strangely. Perhaps you may hear of your
friend's imprisonment. I expect no other preferment. God
grant I may behave so, that when I suffer, it may not be for
my own imprudences, but for righteousness' sake, and then
I am sure the spirit of Christ and of glory will rest upon my
soul. Oh dear Mr. H—, I beseech you, break off from the
world. Shake off every fetter that keeps your soul from God,
and then how will it rejoice the heart of, dear Sir,
Yours eternally,
G. W.
LETTER XLVI.
Dear Mr. H___, London, April 27, 1739.
I rejoice to hear of the affection of my countrymen. It is a
good sign that the word has taken deep root in their hearts.
But above all, do I rejoice that dear Mr. H— is truly sensible
of the free grace of God in Christ. Now, my dear friend,
you will begin to be a Christian indeed. Blessed be God,
I hear my honored Mr. M is becoming a fool for Christ's
sake. I do not despair of Mr. H.; nay, I cannot despair
of anyone, when I consider what I once was myself. Let
but God speak the word, and the work shall be done. I al-
ways hope well of opposers. Today, my master by his pro-
vidence and spirit compelled me to preach in the churchyard
at Islington. Tomorrow I am to repeat that mad trick, and
on Sunday to go out into Moorfields. The word of the
Lord runs and is glorified. People's hearts seem quite broken.
God strengthens me exceedingly. — I preach till I sweat
through and through. All is well at Savannah. Brave news
from Gibraltar. Innumerable blessings does God pour down
upon me. Oh that I had a thankful heart. I love you both,
sincerely; I thank you both heartily. I salute all our dear
friends most affectionately, and am, dear Sir,
Ever, ever yours,
G. W.
LETTER XLVII.
Dear Mr. H __, London, May 10, 1739.
The hour for my imprisonment is not yet come. I
am not fit as yet to be so highly honoured. God
only knows the treachery of my heart; but amidst all
my late success, I have scarce felt one self-complacent
thought. I speak this to the honour of God's free grace.
In about three weeks, God willing, we embark for Pennsylvania.
The trustees have granted to me land and everything
upon my own terms; the officers and general are exceedingly
kind to my friend Habersham on my account, so that all
things succeed beyond my expectations. I am sorry to hear
of Mr. J's conduct—Poor man! The love of money is
rooted in his heart. Where is the honesty he so much boasts
of and relies on? Does not this more and more convince you
that nothing but a true faith in Jesus Christ will enable
you to act aright? However, he is not to be envied. I pity
him. Money, thus got, will never prosper. I rejoice that
you and your spouse are content. I wish you both may have
Jesus Christ formed in your hearts, and am
Ever, ever yours, &c.
G. W.
LETTER XLVIII
My dear Brethren in Christ, Blendon, June 12, 1739.
I am jealous over you with a godly jealousy, and therefore
write to you this second letter. I find more and more that Satan
has desired to have some of you in particular, that he may
sift you as wheat, and will strive if possible to divide and sep-
arate you all. — I hear there is a woman among you, who pre-
tends to the spirit of prophecy, and what is more unaccount-
able, I hear that Brother— (whom I love in the bowels of
Jesus Christ) seems to approve of her. Need therefore, great
need have you, my brethren, at this time to take the apostle's
advice, and to try the spirits whether they be of God. For the
devil is beginning to mimic God's work, and because ter-
rors will not do, he is now transforming himself into an angel
of light in order more effectually to gain his point. Brother
also, I cannot but think, at present is under a spirit of
delusion. He, as well as brother, I believe imagines there
will be a power given to work miracles, and that now Christ
is coming to reign a thousand years upon the earth. — But
alas! what need is there of miracles, such as healing sick
bodies, and restoring sight to blind eyes, when we see
greater miracles every day done by the power of God's word?
Do not the spiritually blind now see? Are not the spiritually
dead now raised, and the leprous souls now cleansed, and have
not the poor the gospel preached unto them? And if we
have the thing already, which such miracles were only intended
to introduce, why should we tempt God in requiring further
signs? He that hath ears to hear, let him hear. And as for
our Lord's coming at this time to reign upon the earth, I
answer, it is not for us to know the times and seasons, which
the Father hath put in his own power.—That a great work is
begun is evident, that it will be carried on I doubt not; but
how it will end, I know not, neither do I desire to know. It
is sufficient for me to do the work of the day in its day,
and to rest satisfied in this, that all will end in God's glory.
Lately, brother told me he was shortly, he believed, to
be called to some public work. — I pray God he may not run
before he is called. To teach, I know, is a pleasing thing;
but to begin to teach too soon or without a commission, will
be destruction to ourselves, and of ill consequence to others.
Uzzah might mean well, when he touched the ark, but his
good intention did not preserve him from the just judgments
of God. Be not many masters, says the apostle. Oh that
that verse was deeply engraven on the tables of our hearts!
My dear brethren, be not offended at this plainness of speech.
I would all the Lord's servants were prophets, but then I
would not have people think themselves prophets of the Lord,
when they are only enthusiasts—If Mr. is acted by a good
spirit, why is he not patient of reproof? Why does he fly in
a passion, when contradicted? why does he pretend to be in-
fallible, and that God always speaks in him? May God
give us all a right judgment in all things. Pure unfeigned
love causes me to use this freedom. Many of you God has
worked upon by my ministry, and therefore I would not have
you ignorant of Satan's devices. O beware of him at this time.
Do not conceive prejudices against each other. Do not dis-
pute, but love; purge out the old leaven from amongst you.
Have no fellowship with any that converse with Mr. If
they have a mind to depart from you, let them depart. Do
you build up each other in your most holy faith. My dear
brethren,
I am your common servant in our dear Lord Jesus,
G. W.
LETTER XLIX
Dear Sir, Lechlade, July 18, 1739.
The scene this morning much affected me; you both put
me in mind, how that happy pair, Adam and Eve,
looked when arraigned by the Almighty after having eaten the
forbidden fruit. Behold the same remedy reached out to you
as to them. — The seed of the woman shall bruise the serpent's
head. — Look up to him whom you have pierced. — He will
heal your backslidings and love you freely — Had he not loved
you both, both of you ere now would have been given over to
a reprobate mind. I know the time, when you both were
enlightened, when you tasted the good word of God, and felt
the powers of the world to come. — Honour, falsely so called,
has caused you to draw back, but I believe not unto perdition.
Jesus is still striving with your heart. Come to him by faith,
renounce the world, and he will yet delight to honour you.
“Now is the accepted time, now is the day of salvation."
Mention not old things, let all things become new. I love
both of you from my heart. Come forth, and be ye separate,
says the Lord almighty. Break with the world at once,
and you shall become fools for Christ's sake. What if your
wife sent some such letter as the following to her parents.
Honoured Father and Mother,
THE contents of this letter will surprise you, but I can
no longer halt between God and the world; the happy
convictions, that God once put into my heart, now arise in
my mind, I will no longer be an almost christian. I am re-
solved to become a fool for Christ's sake. Blessed be God,
Mr. M— is like-minded. —Hitherto have I hindered him in
his spiritual progress, God forbid I should do it any longer.
Henceforward will we go hand in hand together, and nakedly
follow a naked Christ.
Dearest Mr. ____, I am ever yours,
G. W.
LETTER L
Dear Madam, London, July 23, 1739.
Your letter filled me with joy and with pity. Pity, to see
you tempted, joy, to find you are thought worthy of
enduring temptation. Satan hath desired to have you, that he
may sift you as wheat. But be not afraid, Jesus Christ is
praying for you, and your faith shall not fail. Your master hath
been in the wilderness before you, and knows by experience,
how to succor those that are tempted. Lift up then the
hands that hang down, and strengthen the feeble knees. In-
fidel books have poisoned your understanding, and riveted
great pride therein. Strong temptations are necessary to mor-
tify that pride, and to teach you that lowliness of heart, which
our Lord calls all that are weary and heavy laden to learn
of him. Look up then to Jesus, the author and finisher of
your faith. He will send you help in every time of need. In-
deed he will never leave you, nor forsake you. Follow him
as the poor Syrophoenician woman did, and though he may now
turn away his face seemingly for a while, yet he will always
support you inwardly by a living faith, and shortly give you
the spirit of adoption, whereby you will be enabled to cry,
"Abba, Father." I speak this by happy experience. I have
mourned, but now I am comforted. I have gone through
the spirit of bondage, and, forever be adored God's free
grace, he has given me the spirit of adoption. And that
you also will have this in God's due time and way, is the
firm belief of
Your unworthy brother, and servant in Christ,
G. W.
LETTER LI.
Dear Mr. H—, London, July 23, 1739.
I wish you joy of your new-born son. Oh that it may be
made a real child of God. I purpose, God willing, to
stand to my promise, either in person, or by proxy. I know
not yet, how providence will be pleased to dispose of me.
I have written to the Lords of the Admiralty for a licence.
Saturday evening next, I hope you will see Mr. Charles
Wesley. He intends to preach at Gloucester, Randwick, &c.
Pray desire Mr. Coll and our other dear friends to appoint
places. Matters go on most bravely here. I think people are
ten times more affected than ever. The audiences full and
numerous, and they give their mites for the orphan house with
a cheerful and ready heart. Have you heard how I preached
upon the stage among the cudgel players at Basingstoke, and
got a blow? Both I and my companions were also turned out
of our inn, and in danger of being beaten heartily. Blessed be
God! My sermon comes out on Wednesday. Heartiest love
to dear Mrs. H—. That Jesus Christ may be fully formed
in both your hearts, is the prayer of,
Ever, ever yours,
G. W.
LETTER LII.
Honoured Sir, London, July 24, 1739.
THOUGH but a child in grace, and a novice in the
things of God, yet I could not escape this opportunity
of showing you, how dear you are to my soul. Though un-
known in person, yet you have long since been known to me
in spirit. I hoped to have seen you ere I left London. I hastened
up to town hoping to have some spiritual gift imparted to me
by that means, but I was not worthy of it, I was not prepared
for such a blessing. —You went before I came. A great work
of God is doing here. The Lord Jesus gets himself the
victory every day; free grace compels poor sinners to come in.
Our brother can inform you of particulars. As for my
own soul, God mightily strengthens me in the inward man, and
gives me often such foretastes of his love, that I am almost
continually wishing to be dissolved, that I may be with Christ.
—But I am only beginning to begin to be a christian. —I must
suffer also, as well as do for my dear Master. Perhaps a storm
is gathering. I believe God will permit it to fall on my head
first —This comes then, honoured Sir, to desire your prayers,
that none of those things may move me; and that I may not
count even my life dear unto me, so that I may finish my course
with joy, and the ministry which I have received of the Lord
Jesus. Though I die for him, yet, I beseech you, honoured
Sir, to pray that I may not in any way deny him. But what
am I doing? I fear, honoured Sir, I am too free. A sense of
your humility and love for the blessed Jesus makes me thus
open. How should I rejoice, if you would honour me with a
line. —I am young, and therefore a word of exhortation and
advice, would much profit, honoured Sir,
Your very humble servant, in our dear Lord Jesus,
G. W.
LETTER LIII
Dear Sir, London, July 25, 1739.
NOT a want of love, but of time, has obliged me to shorten
my late letters. Had I a hundred hands, I could employ
them all. The harvest is very great. I am ashamed I
can do no more for him, who has done so much for me; not
by way of retaliation, but gratitude. Fain would I love my
master, and will not go from him; his service is perfect freedom;
his yoke is easy, his burden light. Still, he is pleased to
show us greater things. Every day affords fresh instances of
the power of his word. I am now about to attack Satan in one
of his strongholds. If I perish—tonight I preach, God
willing, where a horse-race is to be. I find my Master
strengthens me for the work. O, dear Sir, pray for me, that
my faith fail not, and that my zeal be tempered with knowledge.
Our brother will prove an agreeable correspondent.
If business prevents my writing, he will inform you what happens
from time to time to, dear Sir,
Your most affectionate in Christ Jesus,
G. W.
LETTER LIV
Rev. Sir, London, July 26, 1739.
JUST now I received your kind letter, and am endeavoring
to catch a few moments to answer it. I thank you for
your encouraging hints. O! dear Sir, continue to exhort, and
provoke me to love and to good works, that I may with patience
run the race that is set before me. Hitherto my dear Master
magnifies his strength in my weakness. Ever since he honored
me to suffer a little reproach for his name's sake, at Basing-
stoke, he has caused me to rejoice with exceeding great joy.
My spirit was stirred within me. Methinks I could willingly
have died to have borne my testimony against the lying vanities,
and devilish entertainments of this generation. By the help
of my Maker, I will go on and attack the devil in his strongest
holds. Do pray, dear Sir, that my zeal may be always tempered
with true Christian prudence. It would grieve me, should
I bring sufferings causelessly upon myself. A trying time, per-
haps, is at hand. O that I may be found faithful! If provi-
dence permits, I will perform my promise. I am blind, I am a
child, I know nothing. I only desire the whole will of God
may be done, in, by, and upon, dear Sir,
Your unworthy brother and fellow-laborer in our dear
Lord Jesus,
G. W.
LETTER LV
Sir, London, July 26, 1739.
I received your kind letter, but must beg to be excused from
dissuading your son to go with me. The employment
in which he is engaged will, in the end, if faithfully im-
proved, tend much to God's glory and his own good. He
now sits by me; I read over your letter to him, and he con-
tinues as resolute as ever. The being disinherited does not
terrify him at all. He has a more abiding inheritance, and is
willing naked to follow a naked Christ.—Dear Sir, let me
advise you to do nothing rashly. If you can pray for a blessing
on your will when you are about to disinherit your son, I shall
wonder. Have a little patience, and then you will find that
your son is about to act wisely. If I thought otherwise, no
one would be more forward to dissuade him, than, Sir,
Your very humble servant,
G. W.
LETTER LVI
London, July 31, 1739.
OH that my head was water and my eyes fountains of
tears, that I might weep over my dear Mr. ____.
What? And has my familiar friend, who has been dear to me
as my own soul, has he taken part with, and gone back to the
enemy? Surely it cannot be! —And yet I must believe it.
But if any one had told my dear friend, that he would
have behaved thus, would he not have cried out, "Is thy ser-
vant a dog that he should do this?" Oh, my dear friend, I
am in pain for you! Alas! who hath bewitched you, that
you should not obey the truth? You did run well; who, or
what hath hindered you? Not a fear of man, I hope; not a
desire of that praise, that cometh of man. I know the time
when my dear friend's heart stood steadfast. I know the time
when my dear friend was willing to be accounted a fool for
Christ's sake, and chose rather to suffer affliction with the
people of God, than to enjoy the pleasures of sin, of false
politeness, for a season. And why should I despair of my dear
friend now? No, I know Jesus Christ was set for the
falling and rising again of many in Israel. Our Lord, I trust,
has prayed for you, and I hope your faith will not totally fail.
Forgive me, I must stop and sigh: God forbid I should be
called, at the great day, to say, that my dear Mr. ____ put
his hand to the plough and turned back unto perdition. Good
God! the thought strikes me as though a dart was shot
through my liver. Return, return. My dear friend, I can-
not part from you forever. Do not speak peace to your soul,
when there is no peace. Do not turn fiddler for the devil.
Do not prejudice or hurt my brother, and thereby add to the
grief you have already occasioned
Your most affectionate friend and servant in Christ,
G. W.
LETTER LVII
My dear Brother, Bristol, July 31, 1739.
BLESSED be God for bringing you in safety home.—
He is a God hearing prayer. May he sanctify our
meeting. I hope to see you here this week. I shall set out
for Deal on Monday,—I long to hear how the soul of my dear
brother prospers. —I long to embrace you in these unworthy
arms. —Methinks I could now sing my nunc dimittis with
pleasure, if my eyes could see my dear brother's salvation. I
hope you have conversed with Mr. Wesley. It will require
some degree of boldness to own either of us before men. God
vouchsafes to honour us: No wonder our names are cast out
as evil.—Dear Mr. __, I hear, is staggered with the fear
of man.—Sister, I trust, is in a good way. When shall I see
you? Come, Oh come and warm my heart, by telling me what
God hath done for your soul. Eternity will be too short to
praise him for what he has done for
Your affectionate brother,
G. W.
LETTER LVIII
Reverend and dear Sir, London, August 3, 1739.
THIS morning I received yours, and though I leave Lon-
don this evening, yet I cannot but snatch a few mo-
ments to send you an answer. I love all that love our Lord
Jesus Christ. The spirit of Christ, with me is the cen-
ter. I love the man, and you in particular, though in all
things he may not follow with me. I rejoice there is a revival
of true religion in Scotland, The spirit of God is moving on
the faces of thousands of souls in England, The word runs
very swift, and satan falls like lightning from heaven. God
hath sent me into the highways and hedges, to compel poor
sinners to come in; many are left to water, what God hath
been pleased to plant; I doubt not of his giving a great increase.
But I am a child, I cannot speak, yet God will magnify his
free grace. God will work, and all oppositions must for-
ward, but not hinder it. —Enclosed I have sent you a sermon
just published. —You may judge of my principles from that.
The picture I highly honour.—May I follow them as they
follow Christ. I am no friend to sinless perfection.—I be-
lieve the being (though not the dominion) of sin remains in
the hearts of the greatest believers. —Time and business will
not give me leave to enlarge.—Besides, I am but a novice in
the school of Christ; and therefore most earnestly beg your
prayers, that I may grow in the knowledge of our common
Lord. At his call, I am now going abroad, and expect to
suffer many things ere I return home.—Reverend and dear Sir,
I wish you much success in the name of the Lord, and am
Your brother and servant in the best bonds,
G. W.
LETTER LIX
Dear Sir, London, August 3, 1739.
I Cannot leave London without answering your last letter.
I am convinced that God calls me now to Georgia, and so are
our friends. God's ways are like the great deep.—He will go
a way by himself. Exitus acta probat. The prophecy you
mention, I dare not apply to myself. What am I, that God
should so delight to honour me? However, I believe the Lord
will work a great work upon the earth. Whatever instru-
ments he shall make use of in effecting it, I care not. If
Christ be preached, if my dear Lord be glorified, I rejoice;
yea, and will rejoice. I wish all the Lord's servants were
prophets. Oh, dear Sir, my heart is now melted down with
a sense of the divine love! Never was a greater instance of
God's free grace in Christ. What am I, O Lord, that
thou shouldest delight to honour me? Even so, Father, for so
it seemeth good in thy sight! Dear Sir, I could now write all
day; but other business demands my attendance.—Yet a little
while, and we shall sit down in the kingdom of God forever,
dear Sir adieu. Oh give thanks, give thanks, and pray for
Your's most affectionately in Christ Jesus,
G. W.
LETTER LX
Blendon, August 6, 1739.
AND would not dear Mr. stay for my last letter?
What, is he retired into the country to learn how to for-
get his God? Is he got into favour with the polite world? Are
not these sad symptoms, that my dearest Mr. — is falling
away apace? He runned into one extreme lately, and now
satan is driving him into another. Did not I forwarn you of
this? O my dear friend, my brother, return to your first love,
otherwise you will find the spirit of God deserting you more
and more every day. Nemo repente fuit turpissimus. But I
can say no more.—Perhaps I am troublesome. However,
give me leave to weep. Permit me to pray for you. Though
you are now dead comparatively, yet, I trust, you will be
alive. Though now seemingly lost, yet surely you shall be
found again. God only knows how much news would rejoice
the heart of, dear Sir,
Your affectionate friend in the best bonds,
LETTER LXI
Dear Mr. __, August 7, 1739.
I Thank you most heartily for your last: Had you been more
particular, I should have thanked you still more. May
God reward you for watching over my soul! Pride and selfish-
ness are the tempers of the devil. By the help of my God I
will never rest till my Master gives me power to overcome
them. It is difficult, I believe, to go through the fiery trial
of popularity and applause untainted. Blessed be God, I am
now sweetly retired. O help me, my dear Sir, by your prayers,
as well as your advice, and believe me desirous to subscribe
myself,
Your's most affectionately in our dear Lord Jesus,
G. W.
LETTER LXII
On board the Elizabeth, Gravesend, August 14, 1739.
Reverend and dear Sir,
YOUR kind letter gave me much satisfaction. It breathed
the language of one, who is a Boanerges in the church
of God. Excess of business prevented my answering it sooner.
As I am now retired from a public life, I trust I shall have
time to try my heart and search out my spirit. Forget me not,
dear Sir, when you are praying for all those, who travel by
land and by water, when storms and winds are blowing over
me. I hope I shall always carry you, and others of my dear
friends in Wales, upon my heart, whenever I go in and out
before the Lord. It would rejoice my soul to hear from you,
when abroad. Exhort me, oh exhort me, to be valiant for
the truth. Bid, oh bid me, dear Sir, to be mindful of a dying
and risen Jesus.—Bid me to remember the riches of his free
grace in pulling me as a brand out of the fire, and exhort me
to lay down my life for his sake.—Brother Harris, I find, has
come off triumphantly. —The hour of suffering is not yet come,
God prepare us all for it! I expect to suffer for my blessed
maker's name sake. But, wherefore do I fear? My master
will pray for me. —Dear Sir, adieu. I know you not in person.
Perhaps I may never see your face in the flesh. However, I
shall see you in heaven, and then you shall see how sincerely I
now subscribe myself,
Your unworthy brother and fellow-servant in Christ,
G. W.
LETTER LXIII
On board the Elizabeth, Gravesend, August 14, 1739.
Dear Madam,
I Cannot think of your favours, and yet forbear writing a
letter of thanks. I cannot think of your parting tears,
and not inform you, how sincerely I pray God to comfort
and refresh your soul. —Oh Madam, your kindness to such a
dead dog as I am, quite surprises me. How much more ought
you and I, and all mankind, to adore the unspeakable good-
ness of our heavenly Father, who has so loved the world, as to
give his only-begotten Son, that whosoever believeth in him
should not perish, but have everlasting life. Dear Madam,
never rest till you have a lively faith in Christ Jesus. God
has put into your heart good desires after it. Continue instant
in prayer; apply to Jesus Christ, as a poor sinner, and yet
a little while, and dear Mrs. shall be a Christian indeed.
Hasten, O Lord, that blessed time. Oh let thy kingdom come,
in full power, into this thy handmaiden's heart! Innumerable
temptations surround you, to make you take up your rest here.
But, I hope, Madam, you will be upon your guard, and let
nothing be thought of, or done, by you, which may any way
tend to indulge the lust of the eye and the pride of life. Sim-
plicity is the very spirit of the gospel; therefore, the more we
learn Christ, the more regardless we shall be of worldly va-
nities. God of his infinite mercy make you a widow indeed!
You see, Madam, how freely I have wrote to you. It is be-
cause I value your welfare. —It is the best return that can be
made, for all favours conferred on, Madam,
Your most obliged friend and fervent in our dear Lord Jesus,
G. W.
LETTER LXIV
On board the Elizabeth, Gravesend, August 14, 1739.
Dear Madam,
YOUR affectionate parting, and the tears I observed you
to shed, even when I was at a distance from you, made
me almost ready to cry out "What mean you to weep and
to break my heart?"
Oh may our dear Lord put your tears
into his bottle, and reward you a thousand fold for all the kind-
nesses you have shown to me! Indeed I am less than the least
of his servants. But yet, so loving is my dear Master, that he
will not let a cup of cold water given in his name, to pass by
unobserved or unrewarded. When partaking of your bounty
of flour, I hope I shall pray that you and yours may eat bread
in the kingdom of God. You have all good desires; I hope
you are not far from the kingdom of God.—Oh let there not
be anything lacking. Give God your hearts, your whole
hearts; let Jesus Christ be your whole wisdom, your
whole righteousness; and then he will be your whole sanctifi-
cation and eternal redemption. I write this from my floating
habitation, to assure you how sincerely I am
Your most obliged friend and affectionate humble servant,
G. W.
LETTER LXV
On board the Elizabeth, Gravesend, August 14, 1739.
My dear Mr. ___
AT length we are embarked; our ship is now going to
the Downs.—Yet a little while, and, God willing, I
shall see you once more in the flesh. My family consists of
more than twelve, besides two children; I hope all are desirous
to know Christ. God strengthens me mightily in the inner
man. The sermon I have sent you is one of my extempore
sermons.—The journal will acquaint you with particulars.—
My brother, the captain, has been with me this last week.—
If he leaves off disputing, and will come to Christ as a poor
lost sinner, he will do well.—The bishop of London has lately
wrote against me; I trust GOD has assisted me in writing an
answer.—It is now in the press.—All the self-righteous are up
in arms.—My Master makes me more than a conqueror through
his love. Mr. has about forty societies in Yorkshire.
Both the Mr. Wesleys go on well—Go where you will, reli-
gion (either for or against it) is the talk.—Probably a suffering
time will come. You will not be ashamed of me, though I
should be a prisoner. Perhaps you will be put to the trial:
But how does my dear friend's heart? Have you found Christ?
Does he live in you, so as to be the alpha and omega, the
beginning and end of all your actions? Are you enlightened
to see the exceeding great riches and fullness of his grace? Oh
how will it rejoice my soul to see you a proficient in the school
of Christ? How will it delight me to see your little flock
pressing towards the mark.—Soon after this reaches Georgia, I
hope to see you.—My stay will be as short as possible at Phila-
delphia. I must not delay coming to my dear, though poor
charge.—I expect to find Savannah almost desolate; but our
extremity is God's opportunity. I believe it will lift up its
drooping head.—For the present, my dear friend, farewell.
Your's most affectionately in Christ,
G. W.
LETTER LXVI
On board the Elizabeth, Gravesend, August 14, 1739.
My dear Brother,
THE agony I was in at your departure, and the many
strong cryings and tears which I offered up to God
afterwards, plainly show, that I love you in sincerity and truth.
Though I am now about to launch into the great deep, yet I
must write you a parting line. I cannot but think you will
come to Christ in earnest. God has most remarkably met
you by his providence. —His spirit has been striving with you,
and I doubt not but it will get the victory over your carnal
reasonings, and the rebellion of a depraved heart. But do not,
my dear brother, I beseech you, dispute against your own hap-
piness. —Be not unwilling to confess that you are not yet a
Christian. Remember what our Lord hath said: "Whoso-
ever receiveth not the kingdom of God, as a little child, shall
in no wise enter therein."—I beseech you, by the mercies of
God in Christ Jesus our Lord, to leave disputing. You
have been, I think, frequently convinced; but nature,
I find, has as frequently interposed, and persuaded you that
you had gone far enough already.—But does not my dear
brother find, that he yet lacks something? Have not his tem-
pers and corruptions; nay, hath not sin itself dominion over
him? Are his affections weaned from the world? Does he
feel himself a poor lost sinner: Is he willing the Lord Jesus
should be his whole righteousness? Is he convinced of the free-
ness, as well as of the riches of his grace? You see, my dear
brother, how freely I deal with you. It is because I love you
with a peculiar love. —Never did my heart exult at the sight
of any relation, as at the sight of you; Surely God intends to
give me my dear brother. He is already an almost; hasten,
O Lord, that blessed time, when he shall be an altogether
Christian, and let thy kingdom, with full power, come into my
dear brother's heart! —How shall I say farewell? If you have
opportunity, pray write to
Your most affectionate, though unworthy brother,
G. W.
LETTER LXVII
On board the Elizabeth going to Downs, August 16, 1739.
Dear Mr.
I Thank God for his goodness to brother Howell Harris, I
thank you for informing me of it. The storm is diverted
for a while, but I expect it to break upon my head one time or
another. God has, for a while, prepared me a place of refuge
in the ship, from whence I write this. Oh beseech him, that I
may improve the retirement by searching out my spirit, I
have almost forgot, that I was in the world. My family on
board is quite settled, and we live and love like Christians.
God only knows where you and I shall meet again; whether
in time or eternity. However, this we know, that both
must be tried to the utmost. Inward and outward afflictions
await us, and all the children of God. I am now reading the
book of martyrs. They make me blush to think how little I
suffer for Christ's sake. They warm my heart, and make
me think the time long till I am called to resist even unto
blood: but I fear the treachery of this heart of mine. Dear
Mr.___, to your past, add one more favour, "pray that
I may be found faithful." I trust I shall have a sweet remem-
brance of you and my other dear friends, when I go in and out
before the Lord. Salute them most affectionately. Exhort
them, oh exhort them to continue in the grace of God;
and forget not to write to, dear Mr. ,
Yours most affectionately in our dear Lord Jesus,
G. W.
LETTER LXVIII
Reverend and dear Sir, Philadelphia, Nov. 10, 1739.
THOUGH business prevents my corresponding with you
so frequently as I did when in England, yet what can
hinder me now, but a want of gratitude and love? Accept
then, dear Sir, my sincere, though late thanks, for all favours
conferred upon me, and assure yourself, I remember both you
and your beloved people at the throne of grace. Nothing will
rejoice me more than to hear, that the good pleasure of the
LORD prospers in your hand. Oh dear Sir, what a gracious Mas-
ter do we serve! His loving-kindness still prevents, accompa-
nies, and follows me. He has not given me over unto death, but
is still pleased to dig and dung round me, and not cut me down
as a cumberer of the ground. I long to be purged, dear Sir,
that I may bring forth more fruit, Since my retirement from
the world, I have seen more and more how full I am of corrup-
tion. Nothing could possibly support my soul under the many
agonies which oppressed me, when on board, but a considera-
tion of the freeness, eternity, and unchangeableness of God's
love to me, the chief of sinners.—In about a twelvemonth,
probably, I shall return again to my native country. Satan no
doubt will endeavour to stir up all his forces against me. By
the help of my God, I will once more come forth with my
sling and my stone.—I shall wait with impatience to hear how
the work goes on in my absence. I trust, God, by this time,
has sent forth more labourers into his harvest. I heartily wish
all the Lord's servants were prophets. I verily believe, the
right-hand of the Lord will not only have the pre-emi-
nence, but also bring mighty things to pass. O how do I long,
dear Sir, to see bigotry and party-zeal taken away, and all the
Lord's servants more knit together. Pray, my due respects
to all that are so kind as to enquire after me. Exhort them to
pray and give thanks for,
Your unworthy friend, brother, and servant in our
dear Lord's vineyard,
G. W.
LETTER LXIX
Reverend and dear Sir, Philadelphia, Nov. 10, 1739.
MAN appoints, but God disappoints. No doubt it was
best that I should not see your answer to the bishop's
letter before I left England. I hope it was wrote with the
meekness and gentleness of Christ, and then no doubt God
will give his blessing. Oh, dear Sir, how is the glory departed
from Israel! In what dregs of time are we born? Boasting of
our orthodoxy and primitive purity, and yet alas! but is
not this enough, dear Sir, to excite our zeal even till it do eat
us up? Wherefore hath God called us by his free grace, and
made a difference between us and others, but that we should
stand up in defense of his injured honour? Your friend, Mr.
___, has told me how plentifully you once tasted of the
good word of life, and felt the powers of the world to come.
Oh that the divine spark may again kindle in the heart till it
become a flame of fire! Nothing will so much enforce your
arguments as a life exactly conformable to the holy Jesus. —
When with you last, I thought you spoke too favorable of
horse- races, and such things. But what diversion ought a
christian or a clergyman to know or speak of, but that of do-
ing good? Many who are right in their principles, are worse
than I could wish in their practice. Oh for a revival of
true and undefiled religion in all sects whatsoever! I long to
see a catholic spirit overspread the world; may God vouch-
safe to make me an instrument of promoting, it! Methinks, I
care not what I do or suffer, so that I may see my Lord's
kingdom come with power. But I know not my own weak-
ness, till I am tried. Dear Sir, pray for me, that I may be
found faithful in an hour of temptation. I expect to be tried
to the utmost, and to hear, that many are become my ene-
mies, who once would, as it were, have plucked out their eyes
for me. It's necessary that such offenses should come; other-
wise, how can I know that I am, what I desire to be, dear
Your affectionate friend and true brother in Christ,
G. W.
LETTER LXX
Philadelphia, Nov. 10, 1739
My dear Brethren and worthy fellow-labourers in Christ,
THOUGH I know none of you in person, yet, from the
time I heard of your faith and love towards our dear
Lord Jesus, I have been acquainted with you in spirit, and
have constantly mentioned you in my poor prayers. The good
pleasure of the Lord, I find, prospers in your hands; and I
pray God increase you more and more, both you and your
children. Scotland, like England, has been so much settled
upon its lees for some time, that I fear our late days may properly
be called the midnight of the church. Blessed be God,
the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has sent forth
many of his servants with this cry, "Behold the bridegroom
cometh." Thousands obey the call, and are trimming their
spiritual lamps, in order to go forth to meet him. I cannot
but think a winnowing time will come after this in-gathering
of souls. O that we may suffer only as Christians, and then
the spirit of Christ and of glory will rest upon us. In pa-
tience possess your souls, and I will leave my cause to God.
You, my reverend Brethren, I am persuaded, are no otherwise
minded; may we go on then in the power, and under the
guidance of the Lord of Hosts. The eternal God will be
your perpetual refuge. He that employs, will protect; as your
day is, so shall your strength be. Let not our dear Lord's
lambs perish for lack of knowledge. "Give ye, give ye them
to eat," methinks, is the endearing, constraining command of
the great Shepherd and Bishop of souls. And O that a due
obedience may be paid to it by me, your unworthy brother.
But I blush almost, when I style myself your brother; for I
am a child, and all of you are fathers. Oh, strive together
with me in your prayers, that the divine strength may be still
magnified in my weakness. You will entreat the Lord to
bless the orphan-house. I have reason to think, God will
bring great good out of it. Oh that I may be prepared for future
favours! Oh that pride and self-love may thoroughly be
subdued! Brethren, I beseech you by the mercies of God in
Christ Jesus, to pray for me, whilst winds and storms are
blowing over me. You are not forgotten by him, who, though
the most unworthy of his Lord's servants, desires to subscribe
himself,
Your affectionate brother, and fellow-pilgrim and
labourer in Christ Jesus,
G. W.
LETTER LXXI
My dear Friend, Philadelphia, Nov. 10, 1739
BECAUSE I will not forget you, I begin to write before
we get on shore. How is dear Mr. ___'s heart? Has
he yet recovered his first love? And is that prophecy, "This
child is set for the falling and rising again of many in Israel,"
as yet fulfilled in him? I cannot but think a good work was
once wrought upon your soul. I cannot but think, God will
yet fulfil his whole will in you. But let not my dear friend
linger any longer. If there is mercy with God, let him be
feared, not disobeyed. If he has promised to heal our back-
slidings, and love us freely, let his goodness lead us to repent-
ance. Prosperity has been a snare to you; every day I see
the excellency of that part of your prayer, "Give me not
riches, lest I be full and deny thee, and say, who is the Lord."
And that petition in our liturgy, "In all time of our wealth,
good Lord deliver us." I always take particular notice of it,
I believe you will not be at all richer this year, than you were
the last.—For as riches increase, our wants increase with them.
—I write not this to have you desert your station, but to excite
a holy jealousy in your heart.—Oh, what would I give to see
my dear friend, as formerly, "Fervent in spirit, serving the
Lord." If God sends me to England again, I shall try my
friends. However that be, I am persuaded, that suffering for
righteousness' sake, is the best, the greatest preferment in the
church of Christ. But how does your little—I would not
willingly say, your great idol. Pray accept a quarto bible for
him. Oh, my friend, give him up to God, and do not
provoke him, by over-fondness and too great indulgence, to
take him from you. The little lambs on board improve brave-
ly; they bear the voyage best of all. They are as lusty as
eagles: God has dealt most gently with us. I hope I may
say, the church in my house salute you and your wife.—I do
not forget her; may she never rest till she comes into the glo-
rious liberty of the children of God! It is a blessed thing, my
dear friend, to be the Lord's freeman. My heart is full; I
regret I have not allowed more paper. My dear Sir, excuse
and pray for
Your most affectionate, though unworthy friend,
G. W.
LETTER LXXII
My dear Sister in Christ, Philadelphia, Nov. 10, 1739
WANT of time, not want of respect, has prevented my
answering your kind letters. I esteem you highly for
Christ's sake. I believe you to be one whom God has
chosen out of the world, and has sealed to the day of redemp-
tion. Nothing, therefore, shall pluck you out of his hands.
Was it not for this promise, my soul would be exceedingly
sorrowful at the prospect of what I may undergo. The innumerable
temptations that attend a popular life, sometimes make me
think it would be best for me to withdraw. But then I con-
sider, that He, who delivered Daniel out of the den of lions,
and the three children out of the fiery furnace, is able and
willing to deliver me also out of the fiery furnace of popularity
and applause, and from the fury of those, who, for preaching
Christ, and him crucified, are my inveterate enemies. In
his strength therefore, and at his command, whenever his
providence shall call, I will venture out again. As yet my
trials have been nothing. Hereafter a winnowing time may
come; then we shall see, who is on the Lord's side, and who
dare to confess Christ before men. None but those who
wholly rely on the Redeemer's righteousness, and are truly
born again of God. Oh pray, that I may be found faithful.
Satan has been very busy with me since I saw you, but I trust
the Lord, by these inward trials, will purge me, that I may
bring forth more fruit. Cease not to pray, that this may be
the happy case of,
Your servant in the gospel,
G. W.
LETTER LXXIII
Dear Mr. ___, Philadelphia, Nov. 10, 1739
YOU cannot well conceive how constantly you have been
upon my heart since I saw you. I think there has been
a sympathy between your heart and mine. I have often pitied
my dying friend, and as often prayed, that he may leave a word
for God. I say, prayed, for God alone can remove the load.
—I know too well what such temptations are, to think they
may be overcome by our own strength. But, my dear Friend,
you and I, weak as we are, can do all things through Christ
strengthening us. —Do you believe on the Son of God? All
things are possible to him that believeth. If the devil there-
fore continues his assaults, resist him, steadfast in the faith. Re-
sist him, my dear Friend, and he will flee from you; rather
suffer anything, than be unequally yoked with an unbeliever.
If you cannot overcome where you are, absence, perhaps, may
cure you. Methinks, I would do and suffer anything, rather
than dear Mr. ___ should be led away.—My companions in
travel have an equal respect for you. We have often joined
in prayer for you, when eating your cake. May God reward
you for that, and all your other kind respects and favors con-
ferred on, dear Mr. ___,
Yours most affectionately in Christ,
G. W.
LETTER LXXIV
Dear Madam, Philadelphia, Nov. 10, 1739
I should think myself highly ungrateful, did I not take all
opportunities of acknowledging the many kindnesses I have
received at your hands. Your last presents have been exceed-
ing serviceable on board the ship, and every time we have tasted
your bounty, I have endeavoured to dart up a short ejaculation
to our kind benefactor. You cannot conceive, dear Madam,
how loving the Lord has dealt with us; he has given us all
things richly to enjoy, and comforted us on every side. In-
deed sometimes he has been pleased to withdraw from me,
and to permit Satan to send me a thorn in the flesh. —But that
was only to show me my vileness, and to prepare me for fur-
ther manifestations of his goodness to my soul. Our voyage
though long has not been tedious or burdensome. My soul
wants retirement. —I dread coming out into the world again.
I am confident, dear Madam, that you will pray for me, that
I may be kept unspotted from it. Oh what a blessed Master
do we serve! His rod as well as staff comforts the soul. His
corrections are all loving, and are only intended to make us
truly great. Though you seemed to doubt, yet I hope to see
you once more before you go hence. I cannot say I expect
liberty long, if I speak boldly the truth as I ought to speak.
Indeed there is no being a true Christian, and yet holding with
the world, so much as some may imagine. Jesus Christ
calls us to simplicity. I have often thought, dear Madam,
that you did not see through the world enough. Numbers are
accounted Christians, who have only a name to live. I pray
God to open all our eyes, that we may see everything clearly.
A time of persecution will show who are Israelites indeed, and
who outside professors. —I hope, Madam, that, when tried,
you will come forth as gold purified seven times in the fire. I
only fear for, and suspect myself. —The Lord my righteous-
ness will uphold me. Dear Madam, God only knows with
what gratitude I desire to subscribe myself
Your most obliged friend and servant,
G. W.
LETTER LXXXV
Dear Mrs., Philadelphia, Nov. 10, 1739.
WHEN last abroad, I could not write to you for want
of knowing your name. Blessed be God we have
since been better acquainted, and I now know your name and
place of abode. May the God, whom I desire to serve, richly
reward you for receiving me into your house. You were one
of my most constant hearers; may you be my joy and crown
of rejoicing in the day of the Lord Jesus. I trust ere now,
you have felt, that the kingdom of God does not consist in
word, but in power. I know that Mrs. ____ would have me
deal plainly with her soul; therefore I shall not scruple to tell
her, how I have sometimes thought she was not yet clearly
enough convinced of sin, and of the perfect righteousness
wrought out for, and to be imputed to her, by the Lord
Jesus Christ, through faith in his blood. —Since I have been
on shipboard, blessed be God, his name has made my soul to
smart, and caused me to see more of my own wr&chedness.
Oh, Mrs. ___, you know not, neither do I myself know as
yet, what a mystery of iniquity is hid even in a heart timely
renewed. I saw a little of it the other day; and had I not
known my Redeemer liveth, and that he ever liveth to make
intercession for me, I must have sunk into despair:
But there's a voice of sovereign grace
Sounds from the sacred word;
"Here ye despairing sinners come,
And trust upon the Lord."
May God of his infinite mercy so work upon you, that, at
at the last day, you may be found having on the wedding-
garment! was I to study to eternity, I could wish you nothing
better. May the ever-blessed God say Amen to it. I hope
your little daughters are in good health. Dear Mrs. __, ex-
hort them to renounce the lust of the eye and the pride of
life, and to abstain from all appearance of evil. I have a sin-
cere concern for you and yours, and with all possible thanks
for your kind presents and affection, I subscribe myself
Your sincere friend and servant in Christ,
G. W.
LETTER LXXVI
Dear Mrs., Philadelphia, Nov. 10, 1739.
AS I do not forget to pray for, so I do not forget to write
to you, to make a proper acknowledgment of your and
your husband's love; exhorting you to save yourselves from
this untoward generation. Before I left London, I perceived
God was working upon your soul. I trust the same God,
since my departure, has carried it on, and that you are con-
vinced of the sin of unbelief. Oh dear Mrs. __, it is a
difficult thing to believe aright; it can only be given from
above. I know many of my acquaintance, who love to hear
me talk and preach, and who receive me gladly into their
houses; but alas! I fear they are self-righteous, and were
never yet truly convinced of sin. They have good desires,
and therefore flatter themselves, that they are good Christians:
But I fear many of them are only foolish virgins. I would
not have dear Mrs. or her husband of this number.
If she hath followed on to know the Lord, I am per-
suaded ere now, she is in some measure brought out of
herself, and taught of God to rely only on Jesus Christ
for wisdom, righteousness, sanctification, and redemption.
If thus minded, your soul is at peace with God, itself, and
the world. If not, let her ask and it shall be given her, let
her seek and she shall find, let her knock and a door of
mercy shall be opened unto her.—All things are possible to
him that believeth—Oh dear Mrs. __, my heart is en-
larged towards you; I long for your salvation: press on and
faint not. Whenever I come, I shall expect to suffer. But
though we die for Christ, oh let us pray that we may
not deny him in any way. Nothing but the free almighty
grace of God can uphold,
Your sincere friend in Christ,
G. W.
LETTER LXXVII.
Rev. and Dear Sir, Philadelphia, Nov. 10, 1739.
I think I may say of you, as the Samaritans did upon ano-
ther occasion, I believe you to be a true lover of our dear
Lord Jesus. Not merely because my brother told me so,
but because I have it under his own hand. Your last kind
letter has knit my heart most closely to you. I love those that
thunder out the word. The Christian world is in a deep sleep.
Nothing but a loud voice can awaken them out of it. I pray
God to strengthen you more and more, and cause you to
triumph in every place. Though absent in body, I am pre-
sent with you in spirit. It would rejoice me to hear of your
success in the Lord, In about a twelvemonth I purpose, God
willing, to return to England; who knows but then I may see
you face to face, and have some spiritual gift imparted to my
soul? I long to die to myself, and to be alive unto God. Me-
thinks I would be always upon the wing; but alas! I have
a body of sin, which at times makes me cry out, "who shall
deliver me?" I thank God, our Lord Jesus Christ will
deliver. But I never expect entire freedom, till I bow down
my head, and give up the ghost. Every fresh employ, I find
brings with it fresh temptations. God always humbles
before he exalts me. Sometimes I speak and write freely, at
other times I am comparatively barren; one while on the
mount, another while overshadowed with a cloud; but blessed
be God, at all times at peace with him, and assured that my
sins are forgiven. I want to leap my seventy years; I long to
be dissolved, and to be with Christ. But I must be made
perfect by sufferings. I expect no other preferment. And
you no doubt will have your share. This is our comfort, if
we suffer we shall also reign with Christ; hasten on, O
Lord, that blessed time, when dear Mr. ___ shall sit
down at thy right hand, with all the spirits of just men made
perfect in heaven! where I trust a seat, though of the lowest
class, is prepared for
Your unworthy friend and servant,
G. W.
LETTER LXXVIII.
Rev. and Dear Sir, Philadelphia, Nov. 10, 1739.
SINCE I saw you last, you cannot well tell with what
pleasure I have reflected on the uncommon power that
frequently attended the word at Bingley. It was to me a sign
of God's good will, both to ministers and people. The for-
mer I was convinced of, before I left England. The last ser-
mon I heard you preach, gave me much satisfaction. I hope
ere now you are convinced of the latter also, and have seen
some good effects amongst your parishioners. However, this
I am assured of, we shall all in due time reap the fruit of
our labours, if we faint not. Let me therefore exhort you,
by the mercies of God in Christ Jesus, to continue un-
wearied in well doing. You have seen the afflictions of God's
spiritual Israel. "Do and live," is most they hear. But what
is this, but requiring them to make bricks without straw?
Arise, arise, then, my dear Mr. ___, and
proclaim the Lord
to be their righteousness. The everlasting I AM now sends
you forth: say not they will disbelieve my report, for God
seems to have given his people the hearing ear and obedient
heart. Fear not the face of man, for the Lord, if you go
out in his strength, shall be with you, whithersoever you go.
I hope my dear and honored friend ere now has preempted
my exhortations. Methinks I see him, with all boldness de-
claring the whole counsel of God, and the attentive people
receiving joyfully the gracious words, which proceed out of
his mouth. Go on, my dear brother, go on; may the Lord
bless you more and more, daily adding to the number of your
spiritual children. — I thank you, from my soul, for all fa-
vours conferred on me, and I pray you may always confess
our Lord and his disciples before men, My most sincere re-
spects attend your help-mate and true yoke-fellow. You are
constantly upon my heart. My next journal will acquaint
you how lovingly God hath dealt with
Your most unworthy friend and servant,
G. W.
LETTER LXXIX
Philadelphia, Nov. 10, 1739.
AND how does my dear Mr. H___s? Is he yet com-
menced a field preacher? I am persuaded my dear friend
is under the guidance of God's spirit, and therefore am con-
vinced he will be directed for the best. He desires to do his
Lord's will, and shall he not know it? Undoubtedly he
shall. Nay, ere now I trust God has pointed out his way,
and he has been upon many a mount str&ching out his hands,
and inviting all that are weary and heavy laden to come to
Jesus Christ. Oh my dear brother, though you come af-
ter me, yet I pray God, you may always be preferred before
me. I trust I shall not envy, but rejoice in my brother's suc-
cess. At present, I find I love him in the bowels of Jesus
Christ; I am frequently with you in spirit, and shall wait
with impatience till I hear of my dear brother's progress in
the Lord. Alas! I fear I do not improve my retirement as
I ought. God has graciously pleased to conduct me in mercy.
The tempter has been busy with me, and I never before was
more deeply wounded for sin. Christ's love will let no-
thing pluck us out of his hands. However, let us constantly
watch and pray, that we enter not into temptation. The
spirit is willing, but the flesh is weak. In about a twelve-
month, God willing, I think of returning to England, I
should rejoice, if you would come and supply my place at
Savannah. If not, I must resign the parsonage, and take upon
me only the care of the orphans. I intend bringing up two or
three, that are with me, for the ministry: more, no doubt,
will shortly be added to their number. If you could come
and teach them the languages, for an hour or two in the day;
we could serve both the orphan-house and parsonage to-
gether. Great things I trust will come out of Georgia. The
Lord Jesus direct your spirit, and if it be his will, send you
as a help to, dear Sir,
Yours most affectionately in Christ Jesus,
G. W.
LETTER LXXX
Rev. and dear Sir, Philadelphia, Nov. 10, 1739.
THOUGH but little acquainted with you, yet I write
this to assure you, what a cordial respect I have for
you. The love of God, which I trust, through his free grace,
is shed abroad in both our hearts, constrains me to love you
in the bowels of Jesus Christ. I remember you in my
unworthy prayers, and am persuaded I am not forgotten in
yours. No one more needs them, whether considered as a
private Christian, or a public minister; thousands are waiting
for my halting; and I know so much of the corruption of my
own heart, that was God to leave me to myself but one mo-
ment, I should with oaths and curses deny my master. As
for my final perseverance, I bless God, I have not the least
doubt thereof. The gifts and callings of God are without
repentance. Whom he loves, I am persuaded, he loves to
the end. But then I fear, lest being puffed up with abundance
of success, I should provoke the Lord to let me fall into
some heinous sin, and thereby give his adversaries reason to
rejoice. A public life is attended with innumerable snares; and
a sense of my unworthiness and unfitness so weighs me
down, that I have often thought it would be best for me to
retire. But I know these are all suggestions of the enemy.
Why should I distrust omnipotence? Having had a legion of
devils cast out of my heart by the power of Christ, why
should I not tell what he hath done for my soul, for the en-
couragement of others. By the help of God, I will speak;
and the more Satan bids me to hold my peace, the more ear-
nestly will I proclaim to believing saints, that Jesus the son
of David will have mercy on them; nay, I do not despair of
publishing these glad tidings even at Wethersfield. In a little
above a twelvemonth, God willing, I intend returning. But
ere that time comes, I trust my dear Lord will purge me,
that I may bring forth more fruit. —Satan has not been want-
ing to sift me as wheat; but my friend, the friend of all,
even Jesus, has prayed for me, and as yet my faith hath not
failed. Oh had I a thousand lives, my dear Lord Jesus
should have them all! For he is worthy, he hath plucked me
as a brand out of the burning, and is continually comforting
me on every side—Read, read, dear Sir, the account I have
sent over to be published of what God hath done for me
in the days of my youth, and it will afford more thanksgiving
and praise. —Pray in the behalf of, Sir,
Your most affectionate friend, brother, and servant,
G. W.
LETTER LXXXI
My dear Friend and Brother, Philadelphia, Nov. 10, 1739.
I Love you in the bowels of Jesus Christ, as a proof of
it, I send this. I heartily wish I could correspond with
you oftener. Your advice would always be seasonable to me;
because you have been a long time in the school of Christ.
I am but just now entering the list, and frequently tremble
at the consideration of what I am to do and suffer. But
when I consider it is for Jesus Christ, who has called me
by his free grace into his marvelous light, and has promised
to be with us always, even unto the end of the world, a di-
vine fire kindles in my heart, and I long to call the lingering
battle on. Satan has been busy with me since I saw you,
especially since my retirement on shipboard. I have often
thought of the folly of those, who go out of the world to
avoid temptation. Satan now buffets me more than when
confined in a ship. I receive this as a great mercy at the hands
of the Lord to keep me in action, and to prepare me for
greater tokens of his love. Before I am exalted, I am always
humbled by some inward trials. They are the most soul-
grieving, but they are the most soul-improving conflicts.
My dear friend, I can say from my heart, "I am the chief of
sinners;" I feel myself so wr&ched and miserable, so blind
and naked in myself, that Satan would tempt me to write
to no one. But the Lord hath rebuked him, and after a
long tedious hour of temptation, fills my soul as it were with
marrow and fatness, and maketh my pen the pen of a ready
writer. Oh that my mouth was filled with his praise! As
yet, blessed be God, in my darkest hours my evidences have
not been in the least clouded. I have been assured my Lord
hath forgiven all my iniquities, transgressions and sins, but
I cannot forgive myself. Oh that I should ever offend against
such dying love! Pray for me, my dear brother, pray for
me, that I may never by pride or sloth tempt the blessed spi-
rit to depart from me. I fear not falling finally; for God I
believe chose me in Christ before ever the earth and the
world were made, as a vessel of his saving mercy; but I fear
I shall provoke him to let me fall foully, and then how will
the Philistines rejoice? This consideration sometimes makes
me to wish that the Lord would cut off my strength in my
journey, and shorten my days. But wherefore do I fear?
Ah me of little faith! You see, my dear friend, how freely I
have unbosomed my heart to you. I cannot call you my
friend, and yet hide from you God's dealings with my soul.
Salute all that love our Lord Jesus in sincerity, and beseech
them to pray for your sincere friend, but the most unprofita-
ble of his dear Lord's servants,
G. W.
LETTER LXXXII
Rev. and Dear Sir, Philadelphia, Nov. 10, 1739.
YOUR kind letters, and kinder visit, have made me
frequently long for a more close correspondence with
you. I find my heart drawn out in love towards you, and
had God so ordered it, could have wished to have perused
what you have written in my defense. I pray God to con-
fer on you that reward, which he has promised to give those
who confess him before men. If the gospel continues to run
and have such free course, I must suffer, as well as preach
for my dear Lord Jesus. Oh lift up your hands, dear Sir,
in the congregations of the faithful, that I may willingly,
(if need be) resist even unto blood; but not with carnal wea-
pons. Taking the sword out of the hand of God's spirit, I
fear has more than once stopped the progress of the gospel.
The Quakers, though wrong in their principles, yet I think
have left us an example of patient suffering, and did more
by their bold, unanimous and persevering testimonies, than
if they had taken up all the arms in the kingdom. In this
respect I hope I shall follow them as they did Christ, and
though I die for him, yet take up no carnal weapon in de-
fense of him in any way. The doctrines of our election,
and free justification in Christ Jesus, are daily more and
more pressed upon my heart. They fill my soul with a slow
fire, and afford me great confidence in God my Saviour.
Surely I am safe, because put into his almighty arms.
Though I may fall, yet I shall not utterly be castaway. The
spirit of the Lord Jesus will hold, and uphold me. That
God may every day enrich you more and more with the
anointings of this spirit, is the hearty prayer of, Reverend and
Dear Sir,
Your most obliged friend, brother, and servant in Christ,
G. W.
LETTER LXXXIII
Philadelphia, Nov. 10, 1739.
TWICE did I purpose to come and see you at —,
but was prevented by that all-wise providence, which
ordereth all things for the best: however, though absent, I
am not unmindful of you. As a testimony thereof I send
you this. And oh that you may be filled with a holy fire,
and such an ardent zeal for God as even to eat you up!
Look round, look round, my brethren, and in imitation of
your common Lord, weep over the desolations of the univer-
sity wherein you live. Alas! how is that once faithful city
become a harlot! Have pity upon her, ye that are friends,
and whatever treatment you may meet with from an ungrate-
ful world, endeavour at least to rescue some of her sons out of
that blindness, ignorance, bigotry and formality, into which
she is unhappily fallen. Arise, ye sons of the prophets; shine
forth, ye who are appointed to be the lights of the world. The
rulers of this world will endeavour to put you under bushels;
but if your light is of God's kindling, all the devils in hell
shall not be able to extinguish it. Be not therefore, my
brethren, weary of well doing. Have you true faith? Keep it
not to yourselves; be willing, as occasion offers, freely to
communicate it to others. How will you be apt to teach
hereafter, unless you begin to teach now? None but those,
who are of a different spirit from that meek man Moses, will
be offended at you. All God's people will wish you God
speed. I am sure I do with all my heart. And I pray
God to sanctify your whole spirits, souls and bodies, and
make you vessels meet for our common Master's use! For
none but those who have felt the spirit themselves, can freely
or feelingly speak of him to others. My dear brethren, for-
get not to pray for,
Your affectionate, though weak brother
and servant in Christ,
G. W.
LETTER LXXXIV
My dear Brethren in CHRIST, Philadelphia, Nov. 10, 1739.
THE cordial love I bear you, will not suffer me to neglect
writing to you: as God has been pleased to bless my
ministry to your souls, so I think it my duty to watch over you
for good, and assure you, constantly you are all upon my
heart. Your last letter gave me great pleasure; but it was
too full of acknowledgments, which I by no means deserve.
To him alone, from whom every good and perfect gift cometh,
be all the thanks and glory. I heartily pray God, that you
may be burning and shining lights in the midst of a crooked
and perverse generation. Though you are not of the church
of England, yet if you are persuaded in your own minds of the
truth of the way wherein you now walk, I leave it. How-
ever, whether Conformists or Nonconformists, our main con-
cern should be, to be assured that we are called and taught of
God; for none but such are fit to minister in holy things.
Indeed, my dear brethren, it rejoiced me much to see such
dawnings of grace in your souls; only I thought most of you
were bowed down too much with a servile fear of man: but
as the love of the Creator increases, the fear of the creature
will daily decrease in your hearts. Nicodemus, who came at first
by night to our Lord, afterwards dared to own him before
the whole council in open day. I pray God make you all thus
minded. For unless your hearts are free from worldly hopes
and worldly fears, you never will speak boldly, as you ought
to speak. The good old Puritans, I believe, never preached
better, than when in danger of being taken to prison as soon as
they had finished their sermon. And however the church may
be at peace now, yet I am persuaded, unless you go forth
with the same temper, you will never preach with the same
demonstration of the spirit, and of power. Study therefore, my
brethren, I beseech you by the mercies of God in Christ
Jesus, study your hearts as well as books—ask yourselves
again and again, whether you would preach for Christ, if
you were sure to lay down your lives for so doing? If you
fear the displeasure of a man for doing your duty now, assure
yourselves you are not yet thus minded. But enough of this.
I love to hope well of you all. I trust, as you are enlightened
with some degree of knowledge in the mysteries of godliness, you
will henceforth determine not to know anything but Jesus
Christ, and him crucified. This is, and this, the Lord
being my helper, shall be the only study of, my dear brethren.
Your affectionate friend, brother,
and servant in Christ,
G. W.
LETTER LXXXV
Rev. And Dear Sir, Philadelphia, Nov. 10, 1739.
WHY so long silent during my stay in England?
why did you not write me a letter of reproof, and
smite me friendly for what you thought amiss in the discourse
between me and a friend at Bristol? I should have taken it
kindly at your hands. When I am unwilling to be told of
my faults, dear Sir, correspond with me no more. If I know
anything of this treacherous heart of mine, I love those most,
who are most faithful to me in this respect: henceforward, dear
Sir, I beseech you by the mercies of God in Christ Jesus,
spare me not. I am blind, I am full of self-pride, and self-
love, and yet know it not. Blessed be God, who during my
retirement has been pleased to let me see something of my
own vileness. I trust he will never leave nor forsake me,
till I know myself even as I am known. I need not fear
the sight of sin, when I have a perfect everlasting righteousness
wrought out for me by that God-man Christ Jesus. The
riches of his free grace, cause me daily to triumph over all the
temptations of the wicked one, who is very vigilant, and seeks
all occasions to disturb me. The Lord Christ is my helper,
and the lifter up of my head. It is good for me to be tempted.
By inward trials I trust my divine master will prepare me for
his future mercies. I am persuaded I shall yet see great things,
and be called to suffer for his name's sake. Through much
tribulation, I must enter into glory. Lift up your hands,
dear Sir, when praying at the sanctuary, in my behalf; in-
treat the same favor of the elect lady. As I am enabled,
it shall be returned; and, God willing, when I come next
to England you may expect a visit from, dear and reverend
Sir,
Your most obliged friend and servant,
G. W.
LETTER LXXXVI
My Rev. And very dear Brother, Philadelphia, Nov. 10, 1739.
EVER since I was favoured with your last most en-
dearing letter, you have been upon my heart more and
more. As I wish all the Lord's servants were prophets, so it
gives me uncommon pleasure, when the Lord raises up one
of our own church. Believe me, dear Sir, when I look upon
her desolations, I can scarce forbear weeping over her. But
blessed be God, who has been pleased to visit her in this our
day. Henceforward, I trust she will be a joyful mother of
spiritual children. Many of late, under God, have been be-
gotten by some of her sons through the gospel, among whom
I may reckon ___: He has been I believe, and trust will
still be the ghostly father of many souls. May he increase
with all the increase of God, and appear before his redeemer
at the last day, saying, "Behold me, O Lord, and the chil-
dren which thou hast given me." Oh dear Sir, words cannot
express how affectionately I desire to esteem and love you.
None but the all-seeing God knows how earnestly I pray and
desire to labor for the prosperity of Jerusalem. Had we a
thousand hands and tongues, there is employment enough for
them all: people are everywhere ready to perish for lack of
knowledge. As the Lord has been pleased to reveal his
dear Son in us. Oh let us stir up that gift of God, and with
all boldness preach him to others. Freely we have received,
freely let us give; what Christ tells us by his spirit in our
closets, that let us proclaim on the house top. He who sends,
will protect us. All the devils in hell shall not hurt us, till
we have finished our testimony. And then, if we should seal
it with imprisonment or death, well will it be with us, and
happy shall we be evermore! But the proof of our sin-
cerity, will be when we come to the trial. I fear for no one so
much as myself. Dear Sir, pray that you never may have
reason to be ashamed of the
Most unprofitable of our Lord's servants,
G. W.
LETTER LXXXVII
Dear Mr., Philadelphia, Nov. 10, 1739.
I hope dear brother hath satisfied you about the que-
ries in your last. I trust you are not angry with me for
being so long silent. Excess of business was the cause. I
write you this, my dear brother, to assure you I have not for-
gotten you. No, you are upon my heart; I pray for your
prosperity both in body and soul, and hope ere we die to take
another tour with you round Wales. God has dealt most
lovingly with us on ship-board. We had very fair weather
most part of our way. Both the good and bad spirit have
been with us in the ship. The one to tempt and terrify, the
other to support and comfort. I need not tell you which has
prevailed. Who shall stand before the spirit of Jesus Christ?
I have had great intimations from above concerning Georgia,
Who knows but we may have a college of pious youths at
Savannah? I do not despair thereof. Professor Franklin's under-
taking in Germany has been much pressed upon my heart. I
really believe that my present undertaking will succeed. My
dear brother, call down a blessing by your prayers. The Lord
will hear those who put their trust in his mercy through
Christ. You see, you know, how many would rejoice at,
and do wait for my halting. Beseech the Lord that they may
be disappointed of their hope; entreat the people of Wales to
join with you. I love them most tenderly. I hope, at my
return, to see them grown in grace. I pray God so to im-
prove my retirement, that my progress may be made known
unto them all. Salute them most affectionately in my name,
and exhort them to continue instant in prayer and thankf-
givings for, dear and honoured Sir,
Your fellow pilgrim and labourer in our dear Lord Jesus,
G. W.
LETTER LXXXVIII
My dear brother in Christ, Philadelphia, Nov. 10, 1739.
As there has been joy in heaven at your conversion, so I
can assure you there has been on earth. I, and my
friends, have not failed to give thanks, that you our brother
was dead, but is alive again; was lost, but is found. Oh
blessed be God for calling you at the eleventh hour. Does
not this display the riches of his free grace; and ought it not
to fill you with his praise all the day long? I wonder not that
you are already become a fool for Christ's sake. All that
will live godly in him must suffer persecution. But fear not
man. The Lord of Hosts Himself will be with you; the strength
of that God who hath called you shall be your refuge. As
you have not long to live in this world, Satan, no doubt,
will rage most horribly against you. Watch and pray that
you enter not into temptation. Your case, God willing, I
intend to publish in my next journal. It is good to keep close
the secrets of a king, but it is honorable to speak of the
works of the Lord. That God may carry on and finish
the good work begun in your soul, is the hearty prayer of
Your affectionate friend and brother in Christ,
G. W.
LETTER LXXXIX
Dear Miss B., Philadelphia, Nov. 10, 1739.
Though, when I came first to London, I thought you
had not made the progress which might be expected in
the twelve months, for want of company; yet your last beha-
viour gave me reason to think that you were yet alive to God,
Oh, dear Miss B., do not slumber or sleep, but be always
trimming your spiritual lamp, knowing you are shortly to
meet the Bridegroom. Study to show the simplicity of Jesus
Christ, and strive to imitate those holy matrons, who not
only administered to our Lord of their substance, but also fol-
lowed him to the accursed tree. Love, love to Jesus, casts
out fear. No doubt they were reproached for his name's sake,
and accounted mad women; but they had a faith which en-
abled them at that time to overcome the world, and by which
they climbed up to heaven. May dear Miss B. be thus
minded! And may I see her at the last day amongst the wise
virgins! Cultivating an acquaintance with Miss D., and
the Miss C.'s, will be a step towards bringing you thither.
Dear Miss B., I am your friend and servant
G. W.
LETTER LXXXIX
Dear Miss B., Philadelphia, Nov. 10, 1739.
Though, when I came first to London, I thought you
had not made the progress which might be expected in
the twelve months, for want of company; yet your last beha-
viour gave me reason to think that you were yet alive to God,
Oh, dear Miss B., do not slumber or sleep, but be always
trimming your spiritual lamp, knowing you are shortly to
meet the Bridegroom. Study to show the simplicity of Jesus
Christ, and strive to imitate those holy matrons, who not
only administered to our Lord of their substance, but also fol-
lowed him to the accursed tree. Love, love to Jesus, casts
out fear. No doubt they were reproached for his name's sake,
and accounted mad women; but they had a faith which en-
abled them at that time to overcome the world, and by which
they climbed up to heaven. May dear Miss B. be thus
minded! And may I see her at the last day amongst the wise
virgins! Cultivating an acquaintance with Miss D., and
the Miss C.'s, will be a step towards bringing you thither.
Dear Miss B., I am your friend and servant
G. W.
LETTER XC
To my Brother, Philadelphia, Nov. 10, 1739.
Though I have written now for some years to my dear
brother, and have availed nothing, yet I cannot cease
striving with him; Who knows but at length the Almighty
may remove the scales from his eyes, and enable him to see
the want of a Redeemer. Indeed, my dear brother, you do
not see it yet, because you do not feel it;
your moral honesty
and good nature deceives you. You think you are rich, and
increased in goods, and do not consider that you are poor and
miserable, blind and naked. You are self-righteous, and do
not rely on the righteousness of the God-Man, Christ
Jesus, for salvation. What would I give was my dear bro-
ther convinced of this? For, till he is convinced, he is
miserable, and does not know it. I pray God to open your
eyes with a sense of his love. Send me a line to Georgia.
God has sent us a comfortable passage. In about a twelve-
month I expect to return. Be not surprised if you hear of
my being more cast out. We must suffer, as well as do, for
Christ. If you are one of his you will rejoice
Your affectionate brother,
G. W.
LETTER XCI
To Madam M___. Philadelphia, Nov. 10, 1739.
I cannot think of the repeated assistances you gave me by
the loan of your coach, and at the same time forbear
sending you a line of thanks. But what is of greater con-
cern, I think it my duty to write to you about a more im-
portant affair; I mean the salvation of your precious and
immortal soul. God was pleased to incline your heart, Madam,
to hear and receive the word with joy. Neither the cares of
the world, nor the deceitfulness of riches, I trust have been
permitted to choke, and hinder the growth of it in your soul.
Indeed, Madam, you cannot be too watchful. It is an abled,
and careful thing, to be a true Christian. The first step to it
is a broken heart, a heart melted down with a sense of sin,
and flying to Jesus Christ for righteousness, sanctification
and eternal redemption. Thousands indeed place Christianity
in good desires, and the having good desires; but this and
much more a person may have, and yet miscarry at last. Pure
and undefiled religion consists in a lively faith in Jesus
Christ, as the only mediator between God and man. A
faith that changes and renews the whole soul, takes it entirely
off the world, and fixes it wholly upon God. This, Madam,
is the faith that you have so often heard me preach, and of
which I pray God you may be a partaker. Though you
have it not yet, you need not despair; God will give it to
all who sincerely ask of him. It is true, Madam, that not
many mighty are called; but it is not your riches shall keep
you from heaven if you truly believe on the Lord Jesus.
Faith in him will enable you to overcome the world, and
cause you even to triumph over the lust of the eye and the
pride of life. Faith will set you above the fear of man, and
enable you to rejoice in being accounted a fool for Christ's
sake. That God may impart this faith to your own, and
little master's soul, is the hearty prayer of, Madam,
Your obliged humble servant,
G. W.
LETTER XCII
Dear brother H., Philadelphia, Nov. 10, 1739.
I congratulate you on your success at Monmouth. God
has yet further work for you to do, ere you are called be-
fore rulers and governors, for his name's sake. By divine per-
mission, in about a twelve-month, I hope to make a second
use of your field pulpits. Our principles agree, as face an-
swers to face in the water. Since I saw you, God has been
pleased to enlighten me more in that comfortable doctrine of
Election, &c. At my return, I hope to be more explicit than
I have been. God forbid, my dear brother, that we should
shun to declare the whole counsel of God. The people of
Wales are much upon my heart. I long to hear how the
Gospel flourishes among you. How prospers your in-
ward man? Being always doing, no doubt you grow in
grace. May you increase with all the increase of God! You
will see my letters to Mr. Jones, &c. As fast as I can, the
rest of our Welsh friends shall hear from me. Oh that I
may never forget their works of faith and labours of love!
Salute them most affectionately in my name; and exhort them,
my dear brother, to contend earnestly for the faith once deli-
vered to the saints. Put them in mind of the freeness and
eternity of God's electing love, and be instant with them,
to lay hold on the perfect righteousness of Jesus Christ by
faith. Talk to them, oh talk to them, even till midnight, of
the riches of his all-sufficient grace. Tell them, oh tell them,
what he has done for their souls, and how earnestly he is now
interceding for them in heaven. Show them in the map of
the word, the kingdoms of the upper world, and the tran-
scendent glories of them; and assure them all shall be theirs,
if they believe on Jesus Christ with their whole hearts.
Press them to believe on him immediately. Intersperse
prayers with your exhortations, and thereby call down fire
from heaven, even the fire of the Holy Ghost,
To soften, sweeten and refine,
And melt them into love.
Speak every time, my dear brother, as if it was your last;
weep out, if possible, every argument, and as it were com-
pel them to cry, Behold how he loves us. Remember me,
Remember me in your prayers, as being ever, ever
Yours, &c.
G. W.
LETTER XCIII
To Mr. and Mrs. D___,
My dear Friends, Philadelphia, Nov. 10, 1739.
When I consider how constantly you attended my
ministry, how gladly you received me into your
house, and how affectionately you took your last farewell;
methinks gratitude obliges me to send you a line. It hath
often given me pleasure to see in what harmony you seem to
live, and how you walked to hear the word of God as friends,
purely, thought I, these are a happy pair. These I trust are
help-meets for each other. Oh that you may go on and pros-
per, and be plentifully rewarded for the favours shown to me,
the most unprofitable of our Lord's servants: he will not
forget your works of faith and labours of love. Whenever
you attend his word preached, I hope he will send you reple-
nished away. Oh that all knew what it is to believe in
Jesus! How soon would they renounce the world, take up
their cross and follow him! Lord evermore give us all this
faith, even a faith working by love; a faith that will enable
us to overcome the world, and cause us to shake off all fear
of man. Pray give my due respects to your friend and his
wife, who used to dine with us. I pray God sanctify you
all in spirit, soul and body, and cause you to sit down on his
right hand with
Your affectionate, though most unworthy,
Friend and servant in Christ,
G. W.
LETTER XCIV
To the Rev. Mr. P___.
Reverend Sir, Philadelphia, Nov. 10, 1739.
You may justly censure me as unkind for not answering
your kind letter. I can only plead by way of excuse
an hurry of business, and my sudden departure from Eng-
land. At my return, God willing, I purpose to see New-
bury, and there to preach the Gospel of the Prince of Peace.
Perhaps my enemies may have so much power given them from
above, as to confine my body: but if I am bound, the word
of the Lord will not be bound. God will speak, and great
shall be the company of preachers. It often rejoices me to
think what a prospect we have once again of hearing the
truth preached as it is in Jesus. I hope we shall catch fire
from each other, and that there will be a holy emulation
amongst us, who shall most debase man and exalt the Lord
Jesus. Nothing but the doctrines of the Reformation can
do this. All others leave free will in man, and make him, in
part at least, a saviour to himself. My soul come not near
the secret of those who teach such things, mine honour be
not thou united to them. I know Christ is all in all. Man
is nothing: he hath a free will to go to hell, but none to go
to heaven, till God worketh in him to will and to do after his
good pleasure. It is God must prevent, God must accom-
pany, God must follow with his grace, or Jesus Christ
will bleed in vain. That God may continue his blessing to
us both, is the hearty prayer of, reverend and dear Sir,
Your obliged brother and servant,
G. W.
LETTER XCV
Dear Mr. ___, Philadelphia, Nov. 10, 1739.
Was not my heart with your heart, when we rode by
the way and talked to each other concerning the
Scriptures? I thought our souls tallied together, and that we
had both drunk of the same spirit. I have often, since that
time, admired the grace of God in you, and even now feel
my soul, while I am writing, intimately united with yours.
What is all this, but the effect and fruit of God's everlasting
love through Christ our Lord? What is it, but an in-
stance of the sovereign will and good pleasure of God, who
will have mercy on whom he will have mercy? Oh how doth
the free, the distinguishing grace of God excite the love of
those, who are made partakers of it! What was there in you
and in me, dear Mr. __, that should move God to choose
us before others? Was there any fitness foreseen in us, ex-
cept a fitness for damnation? I believe not. No, God chose
us from eternity, he called us in time, and I am persuaded
will keep us from falling finally, till time shall be no more.
Consider the Gospel in this view, and it appears a consistent
scheme, though directly contrary to the natural man; and
nothing convinces me more of the truth of these doctrines,
than the enmity that is in the heart of carnal minds against
them. However, the power of God is able to pull down
everything that exalts itself against the knowledge of our
Lord Jesus Christ. Henceforward I hope I shall speak
boldly and plainly as I ought to speak, and not fail to declare
the whole counsel of God. I pray daily, that I may know
his will more perfectly, not only that I may do it myself, but
that I may teach it to others. If I die for it, I cannot but
speak the things which I know. Oh my dear friends, lift up
your hands for me in the sanctuary. The prayers of the faith-
ful, God will hear. Entreat the same favor of your brother.
I love you both in the bowels of Jesus Christ, and remem-
ber you often when I go in and out before the Lord: He has
been with us in the ship. His rod has corrected, his staff has
comforted us; both his rod and staff have edified and
strengthened our souls. In a year's time I hope to see England.
My love to all friends, and beseech them to pray that I may
be prepared for whatever awaits
Your affectionate brother and servant in Christ Jesus,
G. W.
LETTER XCVI
To Mrs. Ann D.
My dear Sister in CHRIST, Philadelphia, Nov. 10, 1739.
I owe you several letters, I will pay you one now; have
patience with me and I will pay you all. If anyone ought
to long to enjoy the communion of saints hereafter, I ought in
a particular manner. God has highly favored me in the ac-
quaintance of numbers of his dearest children. I cannot see
some, and to but few of them can I write, on account of other
business. Hasten, O Lord, that blessed time, when we shall
all sit down to eat bread in thy kingdom! —My dear Sister,
pray that I may patiently wait till my change shall come. I
want to leap my seventy years. I long to be dissolved to be
with Christ. Sometimes it arises from a fear of falling,
knowing what a body of sin I carry about me. Sometimes,
from a prospect of future labors and sufferings, I am out of
humor, and wish for death as Elijah did: At others, I am
tempted, and then I long to be freed from temptations. But
it is not thus always: There are times when my soul has such
foretastes of God, that I long more eagerly to be with him;
and the frequent prospect of the happiness which the spirits of
just men made perfect now enjoy, often carries me as it were
into another world. Many such sweet meditations has my
soul been favored with; but in the midst of all, I have felt,
and do feel, that I am the chief of sinners. A mystery of ini-
quity that lay in my heart undiscovered, has been opened to my
view, since my retirement in the ship. May he enlighten me
more and more, to know and feel the mystery of his electing,
soul-transforming love. Nothing like that, to support us un-
der present, and all the various future trials which await us.
But the Lord has apprehended us, and will not let us go.
Men and devils may do their worst; our Jesus will suffer no-
thing to pluck us out of his Almighty hands; for he has loved
us with an everlasting love, and therefore his right-hand shall
uphold us. By his assistance, we shall hold out to the end.
By his grace, I, you, and all his chosen ones shall finally be
saved. Then, my dear Sister, shall we converse, not with ink
and paper, but face to face. Then, but not till then, shall we
fully know what a legion of devils Jesus Christ hath cast
out of our souls, and how, after all our strivings against, and
quenching many of the motions of his spirit, he at last brought
us to glory. Cease not to pray for
Your unworthy brother in Christ,
G. W.
LETTER XCVII
To the Rev. Mr. R.
My dear Brother R., Philadelphia, Nov. 10, 1739.
Before I left England, I heard of your progress in
Leicestershire and Nottingham. I then rejoiced, yea, and
I do now rejoice that God hath sent you forth into his vine-
yard. I wish you all imaginable success with my whole heart.
The next news I hear from England, I suppose, will inform
me of your suffering, as well as preaching for Christ. But I
am persuaded a prospect of suffering does not damp, but excite
the zeal of my dear fellow-labourer. He lives in a place where
honest John Bunyan was a prisoner of the Lord for twelve
years. And oh, what sweet communion did he enjoy in Bed-
ford jail! I really believe a minister will learn more by one
month's confinement, than by a year's study. Press on then,
my dear Brother, press on and faint not; speak till you can
speak no more. Wait upon the Lord, and you shall renew
your strength. Though sometimes faint, yet still pursue. Up
and be doing, and the Lord be with you. See how the fields
are white, everywhere ready to harvest. See how our Lord's
sheep are scattered abroad, having too, too few true shep-
herds; I beseech you, go on, and point out to them the Re-
deemer's good pastures. Say not, wherewithal shall I feed
them? The great shepherd shall furnish you with food enough,
and to spare. Give of your loaves, and you shall take up of
the fragments that remain. To him that hath, shall be given.
Satan no doubt will resist you; he will bid you, out of a false
humility, to hold your peace; but let my friend speak out
boldly as he ought to speak. The Holy Spirit will give him
utterance, and apply the word to the hearers. If prayers may
water the good seed, you may depend on mine. I remember
the dear Bedford people. O let them not forget
Your poor weak brother in Christ,
G. W.
LETTER XCVIII
To the Rev. Mr. T.
Reverend and dear Sir, Philadelphia, Nov. 10, 1739.
Before I saw, I loved you. Ever since our personal ac-
quaintance, I have often thought, what a noble instru-
ment you might be of turning many to righteousness, if your
heart was entirely freed from the world, and inflamed with the
love of God. Your vivacity of spirit, your warm imagina-
tion, the energy and strength of your endearing manner of
writing, together with your loving, tender disposition, if once
duly influenced by the spirit of God, could not fail of winning
souls to Christ. Come out therefore my brother, my friend;
come out from among your carnal connections, and "be
thou separate," saith the Lord Almighty. Throw off a false
politeness, study the simplicity of Jesus Christ, and be de-
spised for something. O pity, pity the church of England. See
how too, too many of her sons are fallen from her articles, and
preach themselves, not Christ Jesus the Lord. My dear
friend, I could wish my head was waters, and my eyes foun-
tains of tears, that I might weep day and night before the
Lord. O let us beseech him to stir up more of his faithful
servants, to go out into the highways and hedges, and compel
poor sinners to come in. Oh that dear Mr. T. may be one of
them! How would the spirit of Christ and of glory rest upon
his soul! Arise, arise, my dear brother, and gird up the loins
of your mind. Arise, arise, and be not of the number of those
who only fleece their flocks. Lift up your voice like a trumpet,
and preach the truth as it is in Jesus. Dear Mr. T. forgive
this freedom. My heart is full. I long to have the pure
scripture truths, as delivered in our homilies and our articles,
preached up universally. This is all that is contended
for, by
Your most unworthy friend, brother, and servant
in our dear Lord Jesus,
G. W.
LETTER XCIX
To the Rev. Mr. D. W.
Reverend and dear Sir, Philadelphia, Nov. 10, 1739.
I love you, though I have been so ungrateful as not to write
to you. I love you in the bowels of our common Master
whose name we bear, and in whose glorious service we are both
employed. Oh, dear Sir, what are we that we should be so
highly favored? Why are we honored? Why are we called
to the ministry, and others that are effectually called by grace,
yet advanced no higher than private Christians? I can only
cry out, "Oh the depth of God's sovereign, electing, unmerited
love. Even so, Father, for so it seemed good in thy sight!"
Surely, dear Sir, the love of Christ must constrain us to-
spend and be spent for the good of souls. Never was the har-
vest greater; never were the laborers fewer. If we do not
now lift up our voices like trumpets, the very stones would
cry out against us. I could almost say, "the glory is de-
parted from Israel; the ark of the Lord is fallen into enemy's
hands." Oh let us endeavour, dear Sir, let us endeavour to
bring it back, by preaching and living the truth as it is in
Jesus. The light that has been given us, is not to be put
under a bushel, but on a candlestick. Satan, indeed, by
blasts of persecution, will do all he can to put it out. If our
light be the light of Christ, those blasts will only cause it to
shine the brighter. You have happily, dear Sir, experienced
this. You, I believe, were both in Christ and in the
ministry before me. "I pray, follow, albeit not at equal pace."
The devil and all his hosts will set their battle in array against
us. My Lord has given me a sling and a stone; stripling as
I am, I will go forth then in his strength, make mention of his
righteousness only, and by that lay prostrate the strong Goliaths.
By your prayers I trust to be sent to Wales once more. The
simplicity of that people much delights me. What shall, what
can I do for them? My prayers they have, and whatever
God shall enable me to do, they may demand a share from,
dear Sir,
Your affectionate friend, brother, and servant,
G. W.
LETTER C
To the Rev. Mr. H.
Dear Mr. H., Philadelphia, Nov. 10, 1739.
I received no answer to my last, yet I must write to you again.
The many happy hours I spent with you when at Oxford,
and the benefit I have received from your instructions and ex-
ample, are yet fresh upon my memory. I long to have my
dear friend come forth, and preach the truth as it is in Jesus.
Not a righteousness or inward holiness of our own, whereby
we may make ourselves meet, but a righteousness of another,
even the Lord our righteousness; upon the imputation and
apprehending of which by faith, we shall be made meet by
his Holy Spirit to live with, and to enjoy God. Dear Mr.
H., it is an excellent thing to be convinced of the freeness and
riches of God's grace in Christ Jesus. It is sweet to know
and preach, that Christ justifies the ungodly, and that all
truly good works are not so much as partly the cause, but the
effect of our justification before God. Till convinced of these
truths, you must own free-will in man, which is directly con-
trary to the holy scriptures, and the articles of our church.
Let me advise dear Mr. H., laying aside all prejudice, to read
and pray over Saint Paul's epistles to the Romans and Galatians,
and then let him tell me what he thinks of this doctrine. Most
of your old friends are now happily enlightened. God sets
his seal to such preaching in an extraordinary manner, and I
am persuaded the gates of hell shall never be able to prevail
against it. Oh that dear Mr. H. would also join with us!
Oh that the Lord would open his eyes to behold aright this
part of the mystery of godliness! How would it rejoice my
heart! How would it comfort his own soul! He would then
no longer groan under the spirit of bondage: No, he would
be brought into the glorious liberty of the sons of God. I
have written to dear Mr. O., as well as to you, out of the sim-
plicity of my heart.
Ever yours in Christ,
G. W.
LETTER CI
To the Rev. Mr. K.
Dear Brother K., Philadelphia, Nov. 10, 1739.
I long to hear how it is with you, and the church in your
house. I verily believe, though it is but a little flock, yet
it will be our heavenly Father's good pleasure to give you the
kingdom. How happy is it, when all are of one mind in a
house, all agreed to entertain and love the Lord Jesus.
Their heaven is begun on earth. I pray God to continue
this blessing, and cause you daily to build up each other in the
knowledge of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ. He is
a gracious Master. Oh that I knew and loved him more! for
he is altogether lovely. Has he yet revealed himself in dear
Mr. K.'s heart? Is he assured that his beloved is his? Is he
brought into the glorious liberty of the children of God? Is
his mind free from scruples? Is he active? Is he punctual?
Is he strong in the Lord and in the power of his might? Is
the meekness of the lamb and the boldness of the lion blended
in his soul? Do his parishioners fear, yet love him? Is he a
Boanerges, and yet a Barnabas in the church of God? Does
he thunder against obstinate sinners, and by displaying the
riches of the promises, comfort and build up the saints? Does
he preach as the spirit gives him utterance? Can he rely on
the promise, "Lo, I am with you always, even unto the end of the world?"
Forgive this freedom, my dear brother. Love makes me thus
impertinent. I want to see you perfect, entire, lacking no-
thing. May God from day to day supply what is still defi-
cient in you and in me, till we come to the fullness of the mea-
sure of the stature of Christ. He is faithful that has pro-
mised. God has been gracious to me his servant. In about
a twelvemonth, I hope you will again see and rejoice with
Your affectionate brother in Christ,
G. W.
LETTER CII
To Mrs. F., Philadelphia, Nov. 10, 1739.
The Lord reward you for all your works of faith and
labours of love! They shall be brought forth as so
many evidences of your lively faith, when we meet before our
Lord in judgment. Does not the prospect of that glorious
day often fill your soul with joy? It does mine. Why? Be-
cause I know my Redeemer is to be my judge. Satan will
accuse me; my answer shall be, the Lord Jesus is my righte-
ousness, how darest thou to lay anything to the charge of
God's Elect? I stand here not in my own, but His robes; and
though I deserve nothing as a debt, yet I know He will give me
a reward of grace, and recompense me for what He has done
in and by me, as though I had done it by my own power.
Oh, dear Mrs. F., how ought this to excite our zeal and love for
the holy Jesus. Why should we desire to plead for a righteou-
sness of our own, and cry up free will, when we have an infinitely
better righteousness than our own to appear in, and a God that
will crown us with eternal glory for working in us both to will and
to do after His good pleasure? Happy are you and yours, that
have been taught these glorious principles from your youth!
Oh show them forth more and more by your works, and let
the world see what it is to have a faith working by love. Study,
oh study, day by day, the simplicity of Jesus Christ. Cast
away everything from you that favors of the lust of the eye
and pride of life. Be quick to hear, slow to speak, and let your
conversation always be seasoned with grace. Oh, dear Mrs. F.,
my heart is enlarged towards you: My kind, my liberal hostess,
what shall I say or do to express my gratitude? I will, I do
speak for you to the King of kings. Though I am so great a
sinner, He frequently admits me into His privy chamber, and
then I often sigh out, “O that my dear Hertford friends may live
before thee." This is all the return, dear Mrs. F., that I can
make. It is a prophet's reward. Being my all, though but two
mites, I know you will accept it from
Your most obliged friend and servant,
G. W.
LETTER CIII
To Mr. S., Philadelphia, Nov. 10, 1739.
Reverend and dear Sir,
I rejoice that God sent you so opportunely to Monmouth; I
find every day that two are better than one. God suffers
his dear children to fall into little miscarriages, that the eye
may not say to the hand, "I have no need of thee;" or again,
the head to the foot, "I have no need of thee." We must
be helps to each other on this side of eternity. Nothing gives
me more comfort, next to the assurance of the eternal con-
tinuance of God's love, than the pleasing reflection of having
so many Christian friends to watch with my soul. I wish they
would smite me friendly, and reprove me oftener than they do;
I would force my proud heart to thank them. But I am
amazed at your coming off so triumphantly. Surely the devil
is asleep, or rather that roaring lion thinks to break out upon
us with double fury hereafter. It often shames me, when I
read St. Paul's account of his sufferings, to think in how few
particulars I can as yet sympathize with him. It as often
makes me long to be like him, and yet I fear how I shall act
when put to the trial. This, however, is my comfort, "Jesus
Christ the same yesterday, today, and forever." He saw
me from all eternity; He gave me being; He called me in
time; He has freely justified me through faith in His blood; He
has in part sanctified me by His spirit; He will preserve me
underneath His everlasting arms, till time shall be no more.
Oh the blessedness of these evangelical truths! These are in-
deed gospel; they are glad tidings of great joy to all that have
ears to hear. These bring the creature out of himself. These,
make him to hang upon the promises, and cause his obedience
to flow from a principle of love. They are meat indeed, and
drink indeed unto my soul. I am persuaded they are so like-
wise to you and dear Mrs. S. I hope she is yet in the
land of the living, and that she, yourself, and your son, are daily
preparing for eternity. I pray God sanctify your whole spirits,
souls, and bodies, and reward you for all kindnesses shown to,
dear Sir,
Your unworthy brother and servant in Christ,
G. W.
LETTER CIV
To the Rev. Mr. T.
Reverend and dear Sir, Philadelphia, Nov. 10, 1739.
Shall I promise and not perform? God forbid. When
I saw you first at Cardiff, it rejoiced my heart to hear what
God had done for your soul. You were then under some dis-
pleasure of your rector, if I mistake not, for speaking the truth
as it is in Jesus. Ere now, I hope dear Mr. T. has had the
honour of being quite thrust out. Rejoice, my dear brother,
and be exceedingly glad, for thus was our Lord and Saviour
served before you. Naked therefore follow a naked Christ.
Freely you have received, freely give. If you preach the gos-
pel, you shall live of the gospel. Though you go out without
scrip or shoe, yet shall you lack nothing. Rather than you
shall want, ravens, those birds of prey, shall be commanded to
feed you. It is a blessed thing to live upon God. Did ever
any trust in Him and was forsaken? No; search the genera-
tions of old, climb up into heaven if you can, and all with one
consent will declare,
"The Lord their pasture did prepare,
And fed them with a shepherd’s care,"
I, though hell-deserving, am a living witness of His good pro-
vidence; having nothing, I possess all things; He has filled me
with the kidneys of wheat, and commanded some one or ano-
ther to sustain me whithersoever I was sent on His errand.
Jesus is the same yesterday, today, and forever. If we go
forth in the spirit of the first apostles, we shall meet with
apostolic success. And never was there more occasion for
the revival of such a primitive spirit. Alas, the life, the power
of religion is almost lost among us. Stir up then, dear Sir,
the gift of God, which is in you. Be instant in season and
out of season. Debase man and exalt Jesus. Self-righteous-
ness overturn, overturn. The people of Wales, the common
people at least, will receive you gladly. The Lord shall fight
all battles for you here, and reward you with a crown that
never fades hereafter. If I have but the lowest place in your
affections, it will abundantly satisfy
Your most affectionate brother,
G. W.
LETTER CV
To Mr. M.
Dearest Sir, Philadelphia, Nov. 10, 1739.
Ever since you opened your heart so freely in the garden,
you have been much upon my heart. Though absent
from, yet I have been present with you. I am acquainted in
some measure with the strugglings of a soul just awakening
into new life. I know too many have stifled their convictions,
and therefore am importunate on your behalf. I hope you
have taken my advice, and laid the ax to the root of the tree.
Oh, pray for a new heart and a new spirit, and then all old
things will subside and give way of themselves. The strong
man armed must go out when the stronger than he, even the
spirit of God, comes to take possession of your soul. What
therefore have you to do, dear Sir, but to throw yourself as a
poor sinner at the feet of the holy Jesus? You need not doubt
his holding out the golden sceptre to you. Whosoever
comes to him by faith, he will in no wise cast out. He calls,
he draws you: what is it for, but to assure you he will make
you happy? Come then, dear Sir, weary and heavy laden as
you are, the Lord your righteousness shall give you rest:
He shall refresh you with a multitude of peace, and cause you
to rejoice in his salvation; there is nothing too hard for the
Lord Christ. He can draw your mind from the creature,
he can fix it upon himself; he can enable you to live above
the world, whilst you are in it; he can translate you to
heaven, when he has taken you away from earth. As the
Lord Jesus can, so that he may do all these things for your
soul, is the hearty prayer of, dear Sir,
Your sincere friend and servant,
G. W.
LETTER CVI
To the Rev. Mr. H.
Reverend and dearest Sir, Philadelphia, Nov. 10, 1739.
It often concerned me, when in London, that I could not
enjoy more of your company. Your conversation was al-
ways seasoned with grace, and such as became the gospel of
Christ. Your great kindness, in publicly praying for me,
can never be sufficiently acknowledged. The thought almost
makes me weep for joy. Surely the Lord will not let
me miscarry, since he has stirred up the choicest of his servants
to intercede on my behalf. The searcher of all hearts alone
knows what agonies my poor soul has undergone since my
retirement from the world. The remembrance of my past
sins has overwhelmed my soul, and caused tears to be my meat
day and night. Indeed I have mourned as one mourns for
a firstborn: But I looked to him whom I have pierced. I
was enabled to see the freeness and riches of his grace,
the infiniteness and eternity of his love, and my soul
received comfort. Oh the excellency of the doctrine of elec-
tion, and of the saints' final perseverance, to those who are
truly sealed by the spirit of promise! I am persuaded, till a
man comes to believe and feel these important truths, he
cannot come out of himself; but when convinced of these, and
assured of the application of them to his own heart, he then
walks by faith indeed, not in himself, but in the Son of God,
who died and gave himself for him. Love, not fear, con-
strains him to obedience. The promises of God are all Yea
and Amen to his soul. Supported by these convictions, in
about a twelvemonth, God willing, I intend returning to
England, and to begin my testimony afresh. I trust I shall
not be ashamed to declare the whole counsel of God. Satan,
no doubt, and his emissaries, will endeavor to block up my
way; but the saints of God are praying for me on earth, and
the holy Jesus is interceding in heaven. Why should I
not go forth and offer his everlasting and perfect righteousness
to all that shall be brought to believe on him? Satan suggests
even whilst I am writing, "How canst thou speak, seeing
thou art such a sinner?" But therefore will I speak, because I
can say, by happy experience, that Jesus Christ will have
mercy on the chief of sinners; for among such you may
truly rank
Your unworthy brother, and unprofitable fellow-
labourer, in our dear Lord's vineyard,
G. W.
LETTER CVII
Dear Mrs. D., Philadelphia, Nov. 10, 1739.
Ten thousand blessings light upon you and yours! The
Lord reward you ten thousand-fold for receiving me
and my friends into your house. The Lord shower down
his heavenly manna, and feed you with the bread of life for
those comfortable meals we have had of your providing since
we came on board. We have not been slack to pray for you;
my heart is now full of a sense of your kindnesses. I know
not when to begin and when to leave off adoring the God
and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ for these and all
other of his love-tokens: He is the father of mercies, and the
God of all comfort; he hath comforted me in all my tribu-
lation, and, I am assured, will still comfort me in whatsoever
I am to do or suffer for his name's sake. You, dear Mrs. D.,
can subscribe to this truth, that God is a God of all comfort.
You have been comforted on every side; you have been filled
as it were with new wine; you have tasted that the Lord is
gracious, and yet the best wine is and will be always reserved
till the last. The Lord's compassions fail not; they are,
they will be renewed to you every morning; and though,
through much tribulation, you, as well as others, must enter
into glory, yet you will find God to be your comforter in all
tribulation. God has made you a joyful mother of Christian
children; remember the mother in the Maccabees; and, if ever
your children are called to suffering, beg of God that you
may stand by and encourage them to die for Christ. Oh,
that would be a spectacle indeed! A spectacle worthy of men
and angels! I pray God to arm you with this mind, and then
you will find that God's rod as well as his staff will comfort
you; nay, though you pass through the valley of the shadow
of death, yet shall the Holy Spirit refresh you; your heart shall
stand fast, and be steadfast in the Lord. Oh, my dear Madam,
my heart is enlarged towards you; I pray God to fill you
with all his divine fullness, and make you daily more and more
meet to be an inheritor among the saints in light. With
much love, I have written to dear Mr. D. Oh, pray him not
to be angry with
Your most affectionate friend and brother,
G. W.
LETTER CVIII
To Mr. N.
Honored Sir, Philadelphia, Nov. 10, 1739.
Be not displeased at the contents of this; if I was not
persuaded that love for your soul, and my duty towards
God, moved me to write, I should be silent. When last at
Gloucester, I heard you were highly offended at my meetings in
the fields, and at the same time countenanced and encouraged
the acting of plays in the Boothall. This I thought highly
unbecoming the character of a Christian magistrate, whose pe-
culiar business it is to be a terror to evildoers, and a praise to
them that do well. This made me to speak against those pro-
ceedings in my sermons. This is the occasion of my troubling
you with a letter. I cannot think I have delivered my soul,
unless, with all meekness and humility, I exhort you hence-
forward not to promote or so much as any way countenance
the stage-players. In our common law, they are styled rogues
and vagabonds. As a minister of the king, upon that account, it is
your duty to put a stop to them: As a disciple and minister
of Jesus Christ, the King of kings, you are obliged, honoured
Sir, to exert your authority in suppressing them. It is notori-
ous that such meetings are the nurseries of debauchery; they
are the pest of our nation, and the bane of true Christianity:
To be present at, or in the least to contribute towards their
support, is therefore a great sin; but to countenance them by
our authority, and let them act by our permission, what is this
but becoming public patrons of vice and immorality? It is
not only sinning ourselves, but it is taking pleasure in the sins
of others. This the apostle accounted the highest pitch of
heathenish wickedness. Honoured Sir, pray be not offended:
These are not the words of a madman; no, they are the words
of truth and soberness, and words which our Lord will ap-
prove of, when I stand with you before Him in judgment.
However men may now put wrong names to things, and call
that an innocent amusement, which has no other tendency but
to corrupt and debauch the heart, yet then, Sir, we shall see
all things clearly; then shall you know that it was my duty to
write as I have done, and will confess before men and angels
that you had a humble and affectionate warning given you,
by, honored Sir,
Your very humble servant,
G. W.
LETTER CIX
To Mr. Thomas P.
Dear Sir, Philadelphia, Nov. 10, 1739.
Though unknown to you in person, yet as you were
pleased to think me worthy of the care of your dear son,
I think it my duty to acquaint you of his welfare. I bless
God that he came with me. He is diligent and pious, and
I trust will be a comfort to you in your declining years. His
mind seems settled and composed, and by reading and following
the Bible, he is partaker of that peace which the world
cannot give. His dear and honored father is much upon his
heart. How would it rejoice him to hear that you also were
become a Christian indeed? Be not offended, dear Sir, at my
expressing myself thus. Assure yourself that Christianity is
something more than a name and a bare outward profession.
Morality of itself, dear Sir, will never carry us to heaven; no,
Jesus Christ is the way, the truth, and the life. There is
no being happy without a lively faith in Him, wrought in the
heart by the blessed Spirit of God. This faith transforms the
whole man, delivers him from the tyranny of his passions, and
makes him entirely a new creature. This is the reason why
it is foolishness to the world. Your son's case in this respect
was not singular. As soon as ever we commence Christians,
we commence fools for Christ's sake. Every truly religious
man must be deemed a madman. Forgive this freedom, dear
Sir; whilst I am writing, I find a love for your soul arising in
my heart, and methinks I could do anything to bring your
grey hairs with comfort to the grave. Dear Sir, there is
mercy with Christ even for those who come in at the eleventh
hour. Christ came to save poor sinners; He came to save
you, dear Sir, if you lay hold on Him by a living faith. That
God may give you this faith, and thereby make you happy
in time and to eternity, is the hearty prayer of, dear Sir,
Your obliged friend and servant,
G. W.
LETTER CX
To the Rev. Mr. R. D.
Reverend and dear Sir, Philadelphia, Nov. 10, 1739.
I think I am a little in your debt; if not, love and gratitude
call upon me to send you a line. Man appoints, but God
disappoints: His providence called me away, before I could
possibly see Cornwall. In about a twelvemonth I purpose re-
turning. Who knows but then I may be enabled to perform
my promise? The whole world is now my parish. Where-
soever my Master calls me, I am ready to go and preach His
everlasting gospel. My only grief is, that I can do no more
for Christ; for I am sure I ought to love and do much,
having had so much forgiven; not that I expect in the least
to be justified by any or all the works I either can or shall do:
No, the Lord Christ is my righteousness, my whole and
perfect righteousness; but then I would show forth my faith,
I would declare to the world the sincerity of my love, by
always abounding in the works of my Lord. Oh pray, dear
Sir, that I may never be weary in well-doing. The devil
and his servants will shoot sore at me that I may fall; but this
consideration comforts and supports me, "The Lord is my
helper;" He has, He does, He will deliver. I am persuaded you
feel His gracious presence, and the influences of His blessed
spirit, whenever you go forth to speak in His name. May a
double portion of His spirit and precious anointings descend
upon your soul! May you be filled with all His fullness, and
be enabled thereby to turn many to righteousness here, and so
shine as the firmament of heaven forever hereafter! Oh that
a place at some saints' feet may be assigned to, dear Sir,
Your weak though affectionate brother in Christ,
G. W.
LETTER CXI
To the Rev. Mr. B.
Reverend and dear Sir, Philadelphia, Nov. 10, 1739.
You have been too kind, and I have been too ungrateful.
Business would not permit me to have as much private
conversation with you as I ought. Success, I fear, elated my
mind. I did not behave towards you, and other ministers of
Christ, with that humility which became me. I freely con-
fess my fault; I own myself to be but a novice. Your chari-
ty, dear Sir, will excite you to pray that I may not through
pride fall into the condemnation of the devil. Dear Sir, shall
I come out into the world again or not? Must I venture my-
self once more among fire-brands, arrows, and death? Me-
thinks I hear you reply, "Yes, if you come forth in the
strength of the Lord God, and make mention of His righte-
ousness only." It is my desire to do so. I would have Jesus
all in all. Like a pure crystal, I would transmit all the
light He pours upon me. Oh, pray, dear Sir, that I may be
thus minded, and then, God willing, in about a twelvemonth,
I intend visiting the British brethren once again. In the mean-
time, I hope the Lord will purge me, that I may bring forth
more fruit, and work upon me mightily in the inner man, for
otherwise His blessings will prove curses to me. He has been
pleased to dig and dung around me, during my retirement; he
has shown me something of the treachery of my own heart,
and more and more convinced me that I am the chief of sin-
ners. Oh, that my heart may show forth the eternity and
sovereignty of His love! for never surely was there a greater
instance of it than myself. Happy are those that are brought
to an experimental knowledge of these mysteries of the kingdom
of God. Many of your charge have been, I believe; I pray
God to increase the number of your spiritual children more
and more, and to add daily to the church such as shall be
saved. My cordial respects attend your fellow-laborers, and
all who are so kind as to ask for me; as fast as opportunity
permits, they may expect to hear from, reverend Sir,
Your unworthy brother and fellow-laborer,
G. W.
LETTER CXII
To Mrs. F., Philadelphia, Nov. 10, 1739.
I have now time to answer your last letter. It gave me much
satisfaction. I rejoice that you begin to know yourself.
If possible, Satan will make us think more highly of our-
selves than we ought to think. I can tell this by fatal expe-
rience. It is not sudden flashes of joy, but having the humi-
lity of Christ Jesus, that must denominate us Christians. If
we hate reproof, we are so far from being true followers of the
Lamb of God, that in the opinion of the wisest of men, we are
brutes. I love you and your dear husband in the bowels of
Jesus Christ. Under God, I begot you both through the
gospel, I therefore think it my bounden duty, from time to
time, more particularly to watch over your precious souls. Never
account me your enemy for speaking the truth. Tell me of
my faults in your turn. I will pray God to give me a hear-
ing ear and an obedient heart. But how do our brethren after
their late dispersion? I heard they had in part recovered them-
selves. Ere now, I trust, they have resumed their courage,
and stand steadfast as a wall of brass. If you were all to be
carried to prison the next moment, I think you should not de-
cline your Christian fellowship and society meetings. My
brethren, in this respect, I beseech you to obey God rather
than man. Happy are you, if you patiently suffer in such a
cause. Our Lord will stand by you; He will fight all your
battles, and make you more than conquerors through His love.
My heart would say more; but other letters must be written.
Salute all the brethren by name, and accept this as a token of
your not being forgotten by
Your affectionate brother and servant in Christ,
G. W.
LETTER CXIII
To the Rev. Mr. S.
Reverend and dear Sir, Philadelphia, Nov. 10, 1739.
The favors received at Hertford, from you and your
dear flock, are not yet out of my mind; They were
exceedingly endearing, and deserve my utmost acknowledg-
ments. Had providence permitted, I should have paid you
another visit; but God's thoughts are not as our thoughts.
However, in about a twelvemonth, by His leave, I hope to re-
turn among you once more. Oh! that I may come in the
blessing of the gospel of peace! The doctrines I have already
preached come with double evidence upon my mind day by
day. I am more and more convinced that they are the truths
of God; they agree with the written word, and the experience
of all the saints in all ages: Nothing more confirms me in the
belief of them, than the opposition that is made against them
by natural men. Election, free grace, free justification with-
out any regard to works foreseen, are such paradoxes to carnal
minds, that they cannot away with them. This is the wisdom
of God, which is foolishness with man, and which, the Lord
being my helper, I intend to exalt and contend for more and
more; not with carnal weapons, that be far from me, but
with the sword of the spirit, the word of God: No sword
like that. Dear Sir, pray for me that I may rightly divide
the word of truth, and give to each his portion in due season.
The Lord has been exceeding gracious to me since I saw you
last. Oh let your songs be of Him, and praise Him for all His
wonderful works. As I am enabled, I remember you and
yours. Many, when I was with them, were mourning; ere
now I hope they are comforted. He is faithful who has pro-
mised, who also will do it. If they hunger and thirst after
Christ's righteousness, verily they shall know that it is im-
puted to them. That you and your whole charge may be
filled with all the fullness of God, is the earnest prayer of,
Dear Sir,
Yours most affectionately in Christ Jesus,
G. W.
LETTER CXIV
To Mr. Win. D.
My Dear Brother, Philadelphia, Nov. 10, 1739.
Your last brought glad tidings. I endeavor to give
thanks for you with my whole heart. I trust God has
enabled you to take the advice you gave me, and that you
have been kept from idolatry. Oh my dear brother, let us
watch and pray, that we may not be led into temptation. The
spirit is willing in both; but the flesh, mine in particular, is
exceedingly weak. Blessed be God for sending me on ship-
board. He has given me to see something of that mystery of
iniquity, which was in my heart. I have loathed and abhorred
my own self. Tears have been my meat day and night; but
glory be to God, who has lately assured me of a victory
through Jesus Christ our Lord. At present my heart is
quite free. You will see what I have written to those of your
household. I pray the Lord to send you and many more such
laborers into his harvest. I intend resigning the parsonage
of Savannah. The Orphan House I can take care of, supposing
I should be kept at a distance; besides, when I have resigned
the parish, I shall be more at liberty to take a tour around
America, if God should ever call me to such a work. How-
ever, I determine nothing, I wait on the Lord. I am per-
suaded He will show what is His will: though my heart is as
yet perverse, in time I hope to drink deeper into His spirit.
How earnestly do I desire to be dissolved, that I may be with
Christ! Sometimes my weak body gives me hopes, that I
shall not be long in the flesh; but then, the strength that is
communicated to me, and the consideration, that I have but
just begun my testimony, fills me with fears, lest I should
live to be grey-headed. But I endeavor to resign myself
wholly to God. I desire His will may be done in me, by me,
and upon me. If the Lord preserves me from falling into
sin, and dishonoring His holy name, let Him do what seem-
eth Him good with
Yours most affectionately in Christ Jesus,
G. W.
LETTER CXV
To Madam C.
Madam, Philadelphia, Nov. 10, 1739.
To be made good by the righteousness and spirit of Jesus
Christ is a distinguishing blessing. To be made
good, and yet to be great and rich in this world's goods, is
still more extraordinary. Blessed be God, who has thus
highly favoured you. I trust He has given you that faith,
which enables you to overcome the world, and emboldens
you to confess both our Lord and His servants, in the midst
of a wicked and adulterous generation. Once indeed I feared
you had been offended. Dear Mr. M soon convinced
me of my error. Yourself, Madam, amply satisfied me before
I left London, that you were not ashamed of the gospel and
ministers of Christ. May the Lord enable you more and
more to set your face as a flint, and entirely to live above
the fear of man. If the work goes on in England, a trying
time will come. I pray God, the same spirit may be found
in all that profess the Lord Jesus, as was in the primitive
saints, confessors, and martyrs. Further opposition then will
not hurt, but highly profit the church. The chaff will be
winnowed from the wheat, and they that are approved be made
manifest. As for my own part, I expect nothing but afflictions
and bonds. The spirit, as well as the doctrine of popery, pre-
vails much in many Protestants' hearts; they already breathe
out threatenings. What wonder, if when in their power, they
should breathe out slaughters also? This is my comfort, the
doctrines I have taught are the doctrines of scripture, the doc-
trines of our own and of other reformed churches. If I suf-
fer for preaching them, so be it. "Thou shalt answer for me,
O Lord my God!" I rejoice in the prospect of it, and beseech
thee, my dear redeemer, to strengthen me in a suffering hour.
You, dear Madam, and the rest of my friends, will not be
wanting in praying for,
Your most obliged humble servant,
G. W.
LETTER CXVI
To Mr. D.
Dear Sir, Philadelphia, Nov. 10, 1739.
Gratitude and love call upon me to write a letter
of acknowledgment for favors received when lately
at [location]. The Lord remember them at that day! You have
confessed His servants before men, He has promised to confess
such, before His angels in heaven. The principles which I
maintain, are purely scriptural, and every way agreeable to
the Church of England's articles. What I have been chiefly
concerned about is, lest any should rest in the bare speculative
knowledge, and not experience the power of them in their
own hearts. — What avails it, Sir, if I am a patron for the
righteousness of Jesus Christ on behalf of another, if at the
same time I am self-righteous myself? I am thus jealous, I
trust with a godly jealousy, because I see so many self-deceivers
among my acquaintance. There is one in particular
(whom I love, and for whom I most heartily pray) who ap-
proves of my doctrine, and has heard it preached many years
past, but I could never hear him tell of his experiences, or
of what God has done for his soul. He has excellent good
desires and intentions, but I think he wants something more:
Lord, for Thy infinite mercy's sake, grant he may know him-
self even as he is known! I need not tell Mr. D, who
this dear friend is — you are intimately acquainted with him,
you love him as you do your own heart; you are never out
of his company. Oh, dear Sir, be not angry. Methinks
I hear you, by this time, making an application, and saying,
"Then I am the man." True, dear Sir, I confess you are.
But love, love for your better part, your soul, your precious
soul, this love constrains me to make this freedom. You are
more noble than to take it ill at my hands; I could not bear
even to suspect that you deceived yourself, dear Sir, and not
tell you such a suspicion was in my heart. That God may
powerfully convince you of self-righteousness, and clothe you
with the righteousness of His dear Son; that He may fill you
with His grace, and thereby fit you for, and at last translate
you to, His glory, is the hearty prayer of, dear Sir,
Your most obliged and affectionate friend
and humble servant,
G. W.
LETTER CXVI
To Mr. D.
Dear Sir, Philadelphia, Nov. 10, 1739.
Gratitude and love call upon me to write a letter
of acknowledgment for favors received when lately
at [location]. The Lord remember them at that day! You have
confessed His servants before men, He has promised to confess
such, before His angels in heaven. The principles which I
maintain, are purely scriptural, and every way agreeable to
the Church of England's articles. What I have been chiefly
concerned about is, lest any should rest in the bare speculative
knowledge, and not experience the power of them in their
own hearts. — What avails it, Sir, if I am a patron for the
righteousness of Jesus Christ on behalf of another, if at the
same time I am self-righteous myself? I am thus jealous, I
trust with a godly jealousy, because I see so many self-deceivers
among my acquaintance. There is one in particular
(whom I love, and for whom I most heartily pray) who ap-
proves of my doctrine, and has heard it preached many years
past, but I could never hear him tell of his experiences, or
of what God has done for his soul. He has excellent good
desires and intentions, but I think he wants something more:
Lord, for Thy infinite mercy's sake, grant he may know him-
self even as he is known! I need not tell Mr. D, who
this dear friend is — you are intimately acquainted with him,
you love him as you do your own heart; you are never out
of his company. Oh, dear Sir, be not angry. Methinks
I hear you, by this time, making an application, and saying,
"Then I am the man." True, dear Sir, I confess you are.
But love, love for your better part, your soul, your precious
soul, this love constrains me to make this freedom. You are
more noble than to take it ill at my hands; I could not bear
even to suspect that you deceived yourself, dear Sir, and not
tell you such a suspicion was in my heart. That God may
powerfully convince you of self-righteousness, and clothe you
with the righteousness of His dear Son; that He may fill you
with His grace, and thereby fit you for, and at last translate
you to, His glory, is the hearty prayer of, dear Sir,
Your most obliged and affectionate friend
and humble servant,
G. W.
LETTER CXVIII
To the Rev. Mr.
Reverend and dear Sir, Philadelphia, Nov. 10, 1739.
The many favors I have received at your hands are still
deeply impressed upon my heart; as I have often said,
so I say again, I hope they will never be forgotten by me so
long as I live. But, reverend Sir, I have observed some par-
ticulars in your principles and conduct, which I must confess
have given me much concern; and of which, from love and
gratitude, I think myself obliged to inform you. I believe,
dear Sir, you have often been inwardly offended at me,
because you suspected, I thought you to be no true Christian.
Your suspicions were not groundless. I cannot yet think
that a thorough work of conversion was ever wrought upon
your soul. I fear you deny that "Jesus Christ is truly
and properly God." I infer this from your not reading the
Nicene Creeds and your palliating that text I once urged to
prove it, "I and my Father are one." I doubt also, your
owning "Original Sin." This I gather from your wondering
I should touch on such a point, when I preached my
sermon on justification by Jesus Christ. Besides, the sad
definition you once gave of religion in a letter to your brother;
the stranger also which you seemed to be to the "devil's temptations,"
when I conversed with you; and your supposing, that conversion
was to be wrought in the soul by moral persuasion; all these put
together, dear Sir, convince me, that you were never yet truly
and effectually born again of God. Besides, Reverend Sir, does your
going weekly to a club, where the company play at cards, and sit up late
at night, does this, dear Sir, agree with your holy vocation, either as a
Christian or a minister? Be not offended, Rev. Sir, at this plainness of
speech. I have forborne a long while; love and gratitude would not
suffer me to forbear any longer. I wish I had no occasion to write in this
manner. I believe you so ingenuous as not to be angry with me. I pray God
to quell all resentment in your heart, and send you his Holy
Spirit to guide you into all truth. Your brother's eyes are
now in some measure opened; he is convinced of the perfect
righteousness wrought out for him by Jesus Christ,
and ere now I hope hath received faith to apply it to his heart.
This is the doctrine of the Church of England. Unless you
hold this and other evangelical principles, how, dear Sir, is
it consistent with sincerity to eat her bread? With humility,
respect, and love, do I offer these things to your consideration—
Be pleased to weigh them in a proper balance, and
reflect from what principle they are written, and I am persuaded
you will not be offended at, reverend and dear Sir,
Your most obliged friend and servant,
G. W.
LETTER CXIX
Dear Mr. S.
Philadelphia, Nov. 10, 1739.
Love animates indeed; I love a catholic spirit devoid of
guile; you I am persuaded are thus minded. The Lord
hath highly favored you: he hath given you a meek and
quiet spirit. My heart hath been knit to you, ever since God
first brought us together. Oh pray, that what I admire in
another, I may imitate myself, and have the graces of Jesus
Christ stamped upon my heart. It fills me with confusion,
whenever I consider how far I am from His likeness. Alas!
What would become of me, was I to be saved by anything
within myself. Blessed be God, the Lord Jesus is my
whole righteousness. By virtue of that I know I am justified,
I believe I shall be sanctified, and am assured I shall be ever-
lastingly redeemed: for God loved me with an everlasting
love. Oh, dear Sir, the prospect of an hereafter fills my
soul with comfort. Then shall I have enough of your com-
pany, and of the other children of God. The Lord give
me patience to wait till my blessed change cometh. He often
gives me such foretastes of the glory to be revealed in us, that
I want to leap my seventy years. But in a degree, I may
say with my blessed master, "I have a cup to drink of, and a
baptism to be baptized with." Dear Mr. S will see
me humbled, I believe, as much as once exalted; I look for
"Away with him, away with him," every day. Then, I trust,
I shall begin in earnest to be a disciple of Jesus Christ.
Even in such an hour, I believe dear Mr. S will dare
to be His affectionate though most unworthy friend,
brother and servant,
G. W.
LETTER CXX
To Mr. D.
Dear Sir, Philadelphia, Nov. 10, 1739.
To think that you should be engaged publicly to pray
for me has often given me much satisfaction, and
now excites me to send you this letter of thanks: help me
still, help me, dear Sir, by your prayers. They will be a
means of lifting up my hands when they hang down, and
of strengthening my feeble knees. Though in all things we
do not, yet in essentials we both think and speak the same
things. I wish all names among the saints of God were
swallowed up in that one of Christian. — I long for professors
to leave off placing religion in saying "I am a Churchman,"
"I am a Dissenter." My language to such is, "Are you of
Christ? If so, I love you with all my heart:" for this rea-
son chiefly, dear Sir, my heart is drawn out towards you.
On this account, though so long in Christ before me,
I make bold to call you brother, and to wish you God speed:
blessed be His name, you have little reason to cry out; "My
leanness, my leanness." Many gracious souls are among your
flock, they love to be fed with the sincere milk of the word.
I hope they will be your joy and crown of rejoicing in the day
of the Lord Jesus. I often think of them with pleasure;
pray salute them most affectionately in my name, and exhort
them to entreat the LORD that I may make full proof of my
ministry. In about a twelvemonth, God willing, I intend
returning to England; I wish it may be in the fullness of
the blessing of the gospel of peace. I think you are happy
in the acquaintance of Mr. B. I trust he
will be as good as he is great, and after he is made perfect
through manifold temptations and trials, sit down with you,
and all the other spirits of just men made perfect, in heaven.
This is the hearty prayer of, dear Sir,
Your affectionate brother and fellow labourer
in our Lord's vineyard,
G. W.
LETTER CXXI
My dear brother, Philadelphia, Nov. 10, 1739.
You cannot conceive how often you have been upon my
thoughts since I saw you. Eternity itself I hope will
not diminish, but more and more increase that love, which I
bear you from my heart. Your stature reminds me of little
Zacchaeus: he that called him, I am persuaded has called you.
Have you not heard Him say to your soul, "I am your sal-
vation"? If so, fear not, thou art a son of David. Let
worldly affairs be ever so bad, he who has given you His own
dear Son, will make you more than a conqueror in all things.
Still dare to own our dear Lord before men. It is no scan-
dal for a follower of Jesus Christ to be poor. Our Lord
was poor before us—So long as we are rich in faith and good
works, it is not much matter if we are not rich in this
world's goods. Having Christ, though we have nothing
else, we possess all things. However, since godliness hath
the promise of the life that now is, as well as that which is
to come, I would advise you to plead the promises for tempo-
ral blessings. In the name of Jesus, many a sweet morsel
and opportune supply, have I f&ched in from God by this
means. That is the way I live, and hope shall continue so
to live till death is swallowed up in victory. Death —
what a comfortable word is that for a believer! Christ
has taken the sting of it away; henceforward it is no
longer a king of terrors, but a welcome messenger to con-
duct the saints to glory. My dear brother, let us comfort
one another with these things. We are not to live here al-
ways; our inheritance is above. When Christ who is our
life shall appear, then shall we also appear with Him in glory.
Why then should we value these light afflictions, which are
but for a moment? No, let us patiently bear our cross, since
we are so shortly to wear a crown. Oh the riches of free,
distinguishing grace! Why were you and I taken into fa-
vor? "Even so Father, for so it seemed good in Thy sight."
Oh! my friend, my brother, let us forever extol free grace!
However others exalt man and debase God, let us exalt God
and debase man. Let Jesus Christ have all the glory;
for He is the author, carrier on, and finisher of our faith.
He has begun it in time, He shall complete it in eternity. —
My brother, I have been so expanded whilst writing, that I
must refer you to other friends, to know how graciously God
has dealt with
Your affectionate brother in Christ,
G. W.
LETTER CXXII
To Mr. W., Philadelphia, Nov. 10, 1739.
I long to be in heaven, chiefly to see God even as He is;
next, that I may have my soul satisfied with the blissful
communion of saints. There I hope to see you and your
wife, and to show how sincerely I love you both in the bow-
els of Jesus Christ. My heart has went along with my
hand, when I used to str&ch it out to you in the field. I
only wanted more time to converse with you. Oh my dear
brother, let us keep ourselves in the love of God through
faith in Christ Jesus, and then, yet a little while we shall
meet in glory. As faith is the beginning, so faith is the end
of the Christian course. Let us keep this grace in continual
exercise, and we may bid death and hell defiance. Faith
makes us more than conquerors over all; I speak thus to you,
because I hope you and dear Mrs. have been in some
measure made partakers of this free gift of God. I pray God
to increase it more and more, till it be swallowed up in the
fruition of our supreme good. Perhaps our faith may be put to
the test ere it be long; I expect nothing but sufferings. Oh
pray that I may be faithful unto the end, and that a crown of
life may be given to
Your affectionate brother in Christ,
G. W.
LETTER CXXIII
To Mr. H., Philadelphia, Nov. 10, 1739.
The Christian love I bear to both your sister and you,
excites me to send you a line. Providence prevented
your sailing with us; but as we have drunk into the same spi-
rit, I hope brotherly love will continue and increase between
us, to all eternity. I have often wrestled in prayer for you
since we have been on board. Your sister has watered those
prayers with her tears, and I trust the Lord was entreated of
us. Our voyage has been highly profitable to our souls. I
can never be thankful enough for this sweet retreat. My
dear brother, how do you find your heart? Mine is like Eze-
kiel’s temple, the farther I search into it, the greater abomina-
tions I discover; but there is a fountain opened for sin and all
uncleanness. There, my dear brother, we may both wash and
be made clean. The Lord hath already vouchsafed us some
assurances of His love. Oh let us continually keep faith in
exercise, till it be entirely swallowed up in the boundless
ocean of the beatific vision. That God may daily renew
you by His spirit, and more and more fit you for the happi-
ness which awaits you above, is the hearty prayer of
Your affectionate though weak brother in Christ,
G. W.
LETTER CXXIV
To Mrs. ___, Philadelphia, Nov. 10, 1739.
Shall I have any leisure time and not write you a line
of thanks for your works of faith and labors of love?
God forbid. I know not your name, but I neither forget
your house, nor favors. The Lord reward you a thousand
fold! I only fear that you have my person too much in ad-
miration. If you look to the instrument less, and to God
more, it will be better. By the grace of God alone, I am
what I am. If any good has been done to you or others, it
was not I, but the grace of God that was in me. Oh, not
unto me, not unto me, but unto God's name be all the
glory. I pray God to make you partaker of the same grace;
for I would not have you a hearer only, I would have
you a doer also. Surely you are more noble and wise, than
to deceive your own soul. And yet it is but too notorious,
that numbers rest in the outward form, and are strangers to
the inward power of godliness in their hearts. Do not you
so learn Christ. Beg of God that you may feel His spirit
working mightily in your soul, and witnessing with your spi-
rit that you are a child of God. I could go on, but other
letters must be written—Pray tender my love to all that dined
with me at your house; exhort them to keep close by faith
to Christ, and to pray to and give him thanks in my behalf;
for he hath dealt most graciously with
Your obliged friend and servant,
G. W.

LETTER CXXV
Dear Mrs. , Philadelphia, Nov. 10. 1739.
STILL I must repeat my former request. Be not angry
because I did not visit you oftener. I love, I honour you
the more for being of low degree. You are thereby rendered
more conformable to our dear and common Lord. His
business alone prevented my seeing you so often as I would.
However, though absent, I rejoice that our Saviour has dealt
so lovingly with you. As afflictions have abounded, consolations
have much more abounded. I am persuaded, you can
affirm that God is the father of all mercies, and the God of
all comforts. Has he not comforted you my dear sister in all
your tribulation? He that hath, and does, will still deliver
you. Yet a little while, and he that cometh will come, and
will not tarry. Shortly I suppose the earthly house of
this your tabernacle will be dissolved: fear not, you shall then
be clothed upon with your house which is from heaven.
Oh pray that such honour may be also conferred on
Your unworthy brother in Christ,
G. W.
LETTER CXXVI
Dear Mr. C , Philadelphia, Nov. 10, 1739.
I Cannot forget your frequent attendance on my ministry
when last at London. I am pressed in spirit to write you
a line, to exhort you to contend earnestly for the faith once
delivered to the saints. You have learned the truth as it is in
Jesus. You have been taught it of God. Electing love
hath snatched you as a brand out of the fire, and you have
followed our Lord without the camp, bearing his reproach.
The Lord's tabernacle has lately been pitched in the fields.
Ere long it may be driven into the wilderness. I hope you
will follow it even there. The divine presence, I am persuaded,
will accompany it. Hath not your heart often burnt
within you when the Scriptures have been opening to you,
though not under a church roof? God is not confined to
places. Wherever his people are, he will find and visit them.
Our Lord (oh stupendous love!) has been pleased to sail
with us. I have tasted both of his rod and staff; each has
given me unspeakable comfort. My dear brother, help me
to praise him. Who is great, so good a God, as our God?
In about a twelve-month I hope to see you again. Oh pray
for me, my dear brother, that I may meanwhile be let further
into the mysteries of godliness, " God manifested in the
flesh." As yet, I find I am but a child, and a mere novice,
But this is my comfort, " The Lord who has begun will
carry on the good work," till I am grown a strong man in
Christ Jesus. I long to know more of his love, I hunger
and thirst after the teachings of his blessed spirit. You, I am
persuaded, are no otherwise minded. Still press on and faint
not. Yet a little while and you shall enter into perfect joy
with
Your affectionate brother in our dear Lord Jesus,
G. W.
LETTER CXXVII
Reverend Sir, New-York, Nov. 16, 1739.
SEEING a passage in your letter to Mr. P- concerning
me, I find my heart immediately set to send you a line.
I love to be acquainted with the true and old servants of
Jesus Christ, because I delight to sit at their feet and receive
instruction from them. You said right, reverend Sir, when
you said " I was but a young divine." Indeed I am a novice
in the things of God. I can only say, that I desire to know
the whole will of God, that I may communicate it to
others. Christ is so good a master, that I would have all
men drawn after him. He is pleased to let me experience daily
teachings of his blessed spirit, and to show me the riches,
freeness, and eternal duration of his love. But as yet I
only see men as trees walking. Oh pray, reverend Sir, that
the Lord would again touch me, and enable me to see all
things clearly. I desire it only for the good of his church.
Reverend Sir, into what a lethargy is the Christian world
fallen! Foolish and wise virgins are all slumbering and sleeping.
It is high time for all that love the Lord Jesus to lift up their
voices like trumpets, and to give warning of the bridegroom's
coming; many I hope are already alarmed. Philadelphia
people receive the gospel gladly. Here, indeed, has been
some little opposition, and therefore I hope success will be
given to the word, and what has been done in England, the
journal sent with this will inform you. Oh reverend Sir, I
beseech you give thanks for me with your whole heart. Entreat
the Lord that I may be kept humble and dependent
upon our dear Lord Jesus. God willing, in about seven
months I hope to see New England in my return to Europe.
An effectual door is there opened, and no wonder that there
are many adversaries. Shortly I expect to suffer for my
dear master. May I not deny him in that hour! If you
would please to favour me with a line, I should be glad to
continue this correspondence, and acquaint you from time to
time how the work of God goes on. Mr. N will convey
anything you shall send. May the Lord richly reward
both him and you, for your love to
The most unprofitable of all his servants,
G. W.
LETTER CXXVIII
Rev. Sir, New York, Nov. 16, 1739.
MR. N', and the report of your sincere love for our
dear Lord Jesus, embolden me to write this. I re-
joice for the great things God has done for many souls in
Northampton. I hope, God willing, to come and see them in
a few months. The journal sent with this, will show you
what the Lord is about to do in Europe. Now is the gather-
ing time. A winnowing time will shortly succeed. Persecu-
tion and the power of religion will always keep pace. Our
Lord's word begins to be glorified in America. Many hearts
gladly receive it. Oh Rev. Sir, it grieves me to see people,
everywhere ready to perish for lack of knowledge. I care
not what I suffer, so that some may be brought home to
Christ. I am but a stripling, but the Lord chooses the
weak things of this world to confound the strong. I should
rejoice to be instructed by you. Mr. A^ will convey a
letter to me—May the God of all grace give you all peace and
joy in believing! May he increase you more and more, both
you and your children! May you every day be feasted, and
built up with such anointings of his blessed Spirit! And by
your fervent prayers, may you be enabled to hold up the
hands of, reverend Sir,
Your unworthy brother, fellow labourer
and servant in our dear Lord,
G. W.
LETTER CXXIX
Hon. Mother, New York, Nov. 16, 1739.
LAST night God brought me hither in health and safety.
I must not omit informing you of it. Here is likely to
be some opposition, and consequently a likelihood that some
good will be done. New friends are raised up every day
whithersoever we go; the people of Philadelphia have used
me most courteously, and many I believe have been pricked
to the heart. God willing, I leave this place next Monday,
and in about a fortnight think to set out for Virginia by land.
In about a twelvemonth, I propose returning to England;
expect then to have the happiness of seeing me suffer for my
master's sake. Oh that God may enable you to rejoice in it!
If you have the spirit of Christ you will rejoice, if not, you
will be sorrowful. Oh my honoured mother, my soul is in
distress for you: Flee, flee I beseech you to Jesus Christ
by faith. Lay hold on Him, and do not let Him go. God
hath given you convictions. Arise, arise, and never rest till
they end in a sound conversion. Dare to deny yourself. My
honoured mother, I beseech you by the mercies of God in
Christ Jesus, dare to take up your cross and follow
Christ.
I am, honoured mother, your ever dutiful
though unworthy son,
G. W.
LETTER CXXX
To the Rev. Mr. P ___.
Rev. and dear Sir, Philadelphia, Nov. 28, 1739.
I HAVE been much concerned since I saw you, lest I be-
haved not with that humility toward you, which is due
from a babe to a father in Christ: but you know, reve-
rend Sir, how difficult it is to meet with success, and not be
puffed up with it, and therefore if any such thing was discern-
ible in my conduct, oh pity me, and pray to the Lord to
heal my pride. All I can say is, that I desire to learn of Jesus
Christ to be meek and lowly in heart; but my corruptions
are so strong, and my employ so dangerous, that sometimes I am
afraid. But wherefore do I fear? He that hath given me
himself, will he not freely give me all things? By his help
then I am resolved to ask till I receive, to seek till I find, and
to knock till I know myself. Blessed be God, I have had a
sweet retirement to search out my spirit and bewail the infir-
mities of my public ministrations. Alas! who can hope to
be justified by his works? My preaching, praying, &c. are
only splendid sins. The blood of Christ applied to my
soul by a living faith, is the only thing that can render them
acceptable. This is the doctrine which you, reverend Sir,
have been enabled to preach, and for which no doubt you
have suffered reproach: But you are now almost at your jour-
ney's end. Yet a little while, and you shall enter into your
Master's joy. In the meanwhile the Lord, I am persuaded,
will keep you as the apple of his eye. He will not forsake
you when you are grey-headed, and your strength faileth you.
The moment you are ripe for our common Master, he shall
translate you to glory; I praise God. I am a child; I must
be tutored and made meet by sufferings to be a partaker of the
heavenly inheritance with the saints in light: But I am per-
suaded God will for Christ's sake finally save, reverend
Sir,
Your unworthy brother and servant in Christ,
G. W.
LETTER CXXXI
Dear Brother F, Philadelphia, Nov. 28, 1739.
INDEED I love you. Why? Because I hope you are an
Israelite indeed; and one of those babes to whom it has
been our Lord's good pleasure to reveal the mysteries of the
kingdom of God. It is special; it is a distinguishing gift.
Be humble, dear James, be humble. Talk little, and think
much. A wise man will guide his words with discretion. Be
zealous for your dear Master. Let a zeal for his honor even
eat you up; but then beg of God that it may be according to
knowledge. Stand fast in the liberty wherewith Christ
hath made you free, and be not again entangled with a yoke
of bondage. Join not one of your works with your faith, in
order to justify you before God: And if God gives you a
spirit of prayer and supplication, fear not to pray as the spirit
gives you utterance. Man may deride, but Christ will ap-
prove and accept you. Dear James, you see I do not forget
you. I hope your little society increases, and that the Lord
will always be adding to it such as shall be saved. Salute
them all most kindly in my name. Exhort them to continue
in the grace of God, and to pray for, dear James.
Your affectionate friend, brother, and servant,
G. W.
LETTER CXXXII
Dear Mrs. S, Philadelphia, Nov. 28, 1739.
HAS the Lord yet heard your prayer? Often have I heard
you say, "Oh! that I had received the faith!" As
often, to the best of my knowledge, have I said, "Amen."
Ere now, I hope our common Master has fulfilled all your
petitions, and given you your heart's desire. If not, what
hinders? Our Lord does not want power, for he is Almighty;
he does not want a will, for he invites you to come unto him.
Search your heart, and see what is the reason the King of
glory does not enter in. Is it too full of the world? Renounce
it. Do you not ask often enough? Resolve to ask oftener.
Do you look too much to some who say they have received
faith, but do not bring forth good fruit? Henceforward look
only to God and your own soul. Or do you not know the
reason? Ask our Lord to show you, and indeed he will; for
he has promised to fulfill the desires of them that fear him.
Your cousin can assure you of this. Oh follow him, as he
does Christ, and you will be as happy as your heart can
wish. Dear Mrs. S, I am, with all possible thanks for
past favors.
Your obliged friend and servant,
G. W.
LETTER CXXXIII
To Mrs. Martha B,
My dear Sister, Philadelphia, Nov. 28, 1739.
I Call you not Martha, but Mary, for I hope you have
chosen the better part, which shall not be taken from you:
And yet not so properly may you be said to choose, as the Lord
to have chosen you; for we love God, because he first loved us.
I can trace my conversion through its several steps, but cannot
find one step I first took towards God. I have been a back-
slider from my very infancy. Had not God called after me,
and by his spirit said unto me, as unto Adam, "Where art
thou? Into what a dreadful condition hast thou plunged thy-
self?" I should have fled from him (if possible) for ever. I am
persuaded you, my dear Sister, can readily say the same; for
otherwise how can we truly value our Lord's redeeming
blood? How can we relish the doctrine of God's free grace,
and our being freely justified by faith which is in Christ
Jesus? Oh let us beg of God to teach us these divine truths
more and more, (for he alone can teach them) and let us lay
out ourselves to teach them to others. You are happy in be-
ing in fellowship with some, who I hope will be ready, if need
be, to seal these truths with their blood. Be humble, my dear
Sister, be humble; and cease not to pray for
Your affectionate brother and servant in Christ,
G. W.
LETTER CXXXIV
Dear Mrs. H. Philadelphia, Nov. 28, 1739.
RACHEL brings me glad tidings: She tells me the
Lord hath touched your heart by the power of his
word, and that your relations have threatened to cast you out
for our Lord's sake. Rejoice and be exceeding glad. If you
endure to the end, and naked follow a naked Christ, great
shall be your reward in heaven. There is no being a Christian
without enduring contempt; no being happy hereafter, with-
out suffering reproach here. The world can only love its own.
As they hate God, so they must hate those that are desirous
to be like him; But be not dismayed; Christ's strength shall
be magnified in your weakness: A living faith will support
you under all. When your father and mother forsake you,
the Lord will take you up. The greatest foes you will find
to be those of your own heart. Subdue these, and outward
crosses will affect you but little. To conquer yourself will be
a laborious task; but if you believe, Jesus Christ shall even
do this for you. Get out of yourself, rely wholly on, and be
a co-worker with him, and he shall be to you wisdom, righte-
ousness, sanctification, and redemption. Rachel greatly wishes
this, but not more sincerely than
Your friend and servant in Christ,
G. W.
LETTER CXXXV
Dear Mr. P. Philadelphia, Nov. 28, 1739.
WHAT a divine sympathy and attraction is there be-
tween all those who by one spirit are made mem-
bers of that mystical body, whereof Jesus Christ is the head!
I loved your departed wife, now with God. I love your
daughter, and the church in your house, in the bowels of
Jesus Christ. Blessed be God that his love is so far fixed
abroad in our hearts, as to cause us to love one another,
though we a little differ as to externals: For my part, I hate
to mention them. My one sole question is, Are you a Christian?
Are you sealed by Christ's spirit to the day of redemption?
Are you hungering and thirsting after the perfect, everlasting
righteousness of Jesus Christ? If so, you are my brother,
my sister, and mother. I desire to love you as myself. This
is my temper; I am persuaded it is yours. Why otherwise
did you so gladly receive me into your house? The Lord
reward you and the rest of your Christian brethren. Indeed I
am present with you in spirit, and wish you good luck in the
name of the Lord. O be not slack to praise him in my be-
half; for I have experienced some rich anointings of his holy
spirit, and have been made to see more into the wonders of
redeeming love. Did I know more of your names, I would
write to more. This is my comfort, I trust our names are
written in the book of life. Yet a little while, and we shall
sit down together in the kingdom of our Father. A place,
though on a lower form, is, I humbly hope, prepared for
Your affectionate friend and servant,
G. W.
LETTER CXXXVI.
Dear Mr. H. Philadelphia, Nov. 28, 1739,
IF I remember, you used to express a great value for my
person and doctrine, otherwise why should you desire a
line from such a wr&ch as I am? When I look into myself,
and consider how poor and miserable, and blind and naked my
soul is, I wonder that any one should pay me the least regard.
But what shall we say? God will have mercy upon whom he
will have mercy. I am entirely indebted to free grace for all
I have, am, or shall be. You also, I trust, dear Sir, are ready
to subscribe to this; for what have we but what we have re-
ceived? What should we have been had God left us to our-
selves? Oh let a sense of this free, distinguishing love constrain
us to obedience: A Christian needs no other motive. That
is a true gospel-faith which works by love. I often think it
almost presumption to think of rewards in a future state; my
Master amply rewards me in this: But present mercies are only
earnest of future favours. Be not therefore, dear Sir, weary
of well-doing, for in due time we shall reap, if we faint not.
The Lord hath multiplied his favours towards me since I
saw you last. We have had a long but pleasant and profitable
voyage. Oh sing praises unto our God in behalf of, dear
Sir,
Your affectionate friend and servant,
W. G.
LETTER CXXXVII
Dear Mrs. A. Philadelphia, Nov. 28, 1739.
THESE words of the psalmist, " Let us rejoice in the
strength of our salvation," often come with great power
and comfort upon my soul. You and I need take much no-
tice of them: For otherwise how often should we have fallen
away from God since our first looking Zion- wards? But the
Lord as he loves us freely, so he will heal our backslidings.
He neither will let us fall into sin or error, so as finally to de-
stroy our souls. God forbid this should encourage us in sin.
It is only intended to support us in danger, and to strengthen
us under temptations. Since there is such infinite mercy
with God, it is a cogent reason why he should be loved and
feared; but not why he should be disobeyed: And since God
has lately led you out of delusion, be more watchful over your-
self, my dear Sister, to follow those who truly show you the
way of salvation.—To hear of your standing steadfast in the
Lord, will highly delight
Your affectionate friend and servant in Christ,
G. W.
LETTER CXXXVIII
To the Rev, Mr. R. E.
Rev. and Dear Sir, Philadelphia, Nov. 28, 1739.
THE cordial and tender love which I bear you, will not
permit me to neglect any opportunity of sending to you.
I bless the Lord from my soul, for raising you and several other
burning and shining lights to appear for him in this midnight of the
church. My heart has been much warmed during my voyage,
by reading some of your sermons, especially that preached be-
fore the associate presbytery. I long more and more to hear
the rise and progress of your proceedings, and how far you
would willingly carry the reformation of the church of Bri-
tain. There are some expressions which I suppose will be
interpreted to your disadvantage, both by your domestic and
foreign enemies. I should be glad to know who are those
martyrs to which you refer, and of what nature those cove-
nants were which you mention in your sermon. My igno-
rance of the constitution of the Scotch church is the cause of
my writing after this manner. I should be obliged to you, if
you would be pleased to recommend to me some useful books,
especially such which open the holy sacrament; for in God's
law is my delight. Boston's Fourfold State of Man I like ex-
ceedingly. Under God it has been of much service to my
soul. I believe I agree with you and him in the essential
truths of Christianity. I bless God, his Spirit has convinced
me of our eternal election by the Father through the Son, of
our free justification through faith in his blood, of our sancti-
fication as the consequence of that, and of our final perseve-
rance and glorification as the result of all. These I am per-
suaded God has joined together; these, neither men nor
devils shall ever be able to put asunder. My only scruple at
present is, 'Whether you approve of taking the Word in de-
fense of your religious rights?'
One of our English bishops I
remember, when I was with him, called you Cameronians.
They, I think, took up arms, which I think to be contrary to
the spirit of Jesus Christ and his apostles. Some few
passages in your sermon before the presbytery, I thought were
a little suspicious of favoring that principle. I pray God
your next may inform me that I am mistaken: For when zeal
carries us to such a length, I think it ceases to be zeal accord-
ing to knowledge. Dearest Sir, be not angry at my writing
thus freely. I love, I honour you in the bowels, and for the
sake of Jesus Christ, from my soul. I wish you good luck
in all your pious undertakings. I pray God to prosper the
works of your hands, and to make you a noble instrument in
bringing many sons to glory. Pray send an immediate
answer, directed as usual, and care will be taken to have it
remitted to, reverend and dear Sir,
Your most affectionate brother, friend, fellow-labourer,
and obliged servant.
G. W.
LETTER CXXXIX
Dear Brother, Philadelphia, Nov. 28, 1739.
IT is much upon my heart to send you a line. Although
you are not with me, yet as God was pleased to touch
you by my unworthy ministry, I love you with a peculiar love.
Business prevented my writing to you when in Yorkshire. I
was sorry to hear that Brother J had reason to blame
your conduct. Say dear brother, be not offended, if in the
meekness and gentleness of Christ, I exhort you to be sober-
minded. Follow after, but do not run before the blessed Spirit;
if you do, although you may benefit others, and God may
overrule everything for your good, yet you will certainly
destroy the peace of your own soul. God has been pleased
to call you by his grace, and to give you joy in the Holy
Ghost: But, my brother, I hope it will be more settled and
substantial, and joined with meekness and humility of heart.
A joy which is the result of inward trials, and flowing from a
long experience of the buffeting of Satan. Such a joy will make
you apt and fit to teach, and keep you from being puffed up
above measure. It will exalt, at the same time as it humbles
your soul. The Lord direct my dear brother in all things:
I wish all his servants were prophets; but let everyone be
rightly persuaded of his call to public teaching. It is danger-
ous to touch the ark, though it be falling, without a com-
mission from above. But no more. I am
Your most affectionate brother in Christ,
G. W.
LETTER CXL
Dear Mr. B. Philadelphia, Nov. 28, 1739.
YOUR kind present of flour has been of singular use to
me and my family; I pray God, in return, to feed you
with that bread which cometh down from heaven. You are
one of my first and choicest friends. You have not been
ashamed to own me, or to attend on my ministry. It will
wonderfully rejoice me, to see you exalted at our Lord's right-
hand in a future state. The way you know. Jesus Christ
is the way, the truth, and the life. Through faith in his blood
shall you have free access into the holy of holies. I hope
dear Mr. B. is not in the number of those, who want to make
a Saviour of their own works, and thereby deny the Lord,
who has so dearly bought them with his precious blood: No,
I am persuaded you are more noble. Mr. B— has not so
learned Christ. He is willing, I trust, to ascribe his salvation
to God's free grace, and to let Jesus Christ be all in all.
I hope your brother, and those young men you brought with
you out of Spitalfields, are likewise thus minded. Though ab-
sent, yet I do not forget them. O exhort them from me, to
save themselves from this untoward generation. My dear
friend, do you go before them, and let them learn of you how
to walk with God. It is a difficult thing to be a Christian
indeed. Numbers are professing, and do not know it. I pray
God you may be delivered from them, and be made experi-
mentally to know that no one can call Jesus Christ "his
Lord," till he has really received the Holy Ghost. I could
dwell on this, but other business obliges me to hasten to sub-
scribe myself, dear Mr. B—,
Your most obliged friend and servant,
G. W.
LETTER CXLI
Reverend Sir, Philadelphia, Nov. 28, 1739.
I AM not willing to go on shore till I have performed my
promise, and sent you a line. I heartily wish I could write
something which might advance the glory of God and the
good of his church. As we both profess ourselves ministers
of the gospel, these two things ought to be our chief and only
concern, and more especially at this time, when men seek their
own and not the things of the Lord Jesus. Oh, dear Sir,
the care of souls I find to be a matter of the greatest importance.
You have a great number committed to your charge. What
a dreadful thing will it be for any of them to perish through
your neglect? And yet I fear, Sir, you do not walk worthy of
the holy vocation wherewith you are called. It is no good
report that I hear of you in common life. Your practice
contradicts your doctrine, and what good can you do, if every
one of your parishioners, whilst you are preaching, may reply,
"Physician, heal thyself?" Besides, Sir, how can you preach
Christ to others, when you are a stranger to his power yourself?
It is next to impossible. I make no apology for this plainness of
speech. Simplicity becomes ambassadors of Christ.
I am, reverend Sir,
Your obliged friend and servant,
G. W.
LETTER CXLII
Dear Mr. G, Philadelphia, Nov. 28, 1739.
INDEED I love you, though it was so long before I came
to see you. Want of time, not of respect, was the cause.
God is my judge how earnestly I long after your salvation,
and how willingly I would spend and be spent in order to pro-
mote it. Oh how closely does true faith in Jesus Christ
our head, knit all his members in love to one another; what
a divine harmony and attraction is there between them, when
they have drunk into and been made partakers of one and the
same spirit? How does the love of God dilate and enlarge
their hearts! How do all little distinctions about externals fall
away, and every other name is swallowed up in the name of
Jesus Christ? This, my dear brother, is that catholic spi-
rit, which will cement all denominations of sincere professors
together. This is the spirit of which free distinguishing grace
has made you a partaker, and which I pray God we both may
partake of every day more and more. He is faithful who has
promised, who also will do it. I find it is not in vain that
we have believed in Jesus. He is God, and his work is per-
fect; his love is like himself unchangeable; his gifts and call-
ings are without repentance, and therefore, though I am but
a babe in Christ, yet I am persuaded I shall see you crowned
with glory. Then, my dear brother, we shall have time
enough together. Then, there will be no parting, no fear of
falling; but we shall drink eternally of those pleasures which
flow from God's right hand forevermore. Supported with
this hope, what hinders but I may come once again, when
the Lord permits, and offer Christ's everlasting righteous-
ness to poor perishing sinners. The devil and his servants
will rage horribly, and perhaps cast me into prison, nay, put
me to death: But if you will come and visit me, by the help
of my God, I will preach to you even there; for I am not
ashamed of the gospel of Christ. I have found it to be the
power of God unto my salvation. Oh, my brother, the fire
kindles whilst I am writing; but I must have done. Pray
salute those dear souls that I spoke to at your house, and all
other friends. Entreat them to pray and give thanks for me;
and assure them they are not forgotten by
Ever yours in Christ,
G. W.
LETTER CXLIII
Mr. H. Philadelphia, Nov. 28, 1739.
AS you stand so nearly related to your daughter, who is
with me, though I am unknown to you in person, yet
I make bold to send you a line to inform you of her welfare.
I find she did not confer much with you about her intended
voyage; but I hope both you and her will have great reason
to rejoice in the end. God has been pleased to visit her with
some illness, but now she is perfectly recovered. What is best
of all, I hope her soul prospers, and is fitting more day by day
for the enjoyment of God. This was the chief end of her
going abroad, and give me leave to tell you, this is the chief
thing you ought, and must pursue at home. But why do I
say at home? A Christian hath no home but heaven. He is a
stranger and pilgrim while here on earth. I hope you know
better, Mr. H., than to think you were born to drive a
team, or plough a piece of ground. These things must be
done, but then they should be done in subordination to the
care of your better part, the soul. Your daughter tells me,
you are now grey bearded. Take heed, dear Mr. H., to
make your calling and election sure. Rest not in outward
things. Do not flatter yourself that you are a Christian, be-
cause you go to church, and do no one any harm. Nothing
but a living faith in Christ Jesus our dear Lord, can qual-
ify you for eternal life. Without this, God will be to us a
consuming fire; and unless we are born again, and made new
creatures in Christ, we never shall enter into the kingdom
of God. If you know not what I mean by these terms, you
may depend upon it, you are a stranger to this new birth, and
consequently in a state of death: but you need not fear; even
at the eleventh hour Christ will accept you, if you come to
him by faith. He has shown mercy to your son and daughter.
Why may he not show mercy to their father also? Whoever
comes to him, he will in no wise cast out. Hasten then, dear
Sir, out of your spiritual Sodom, Linger not. Nothing will
more rejoice your dear children, than to see you brought to
an experimental knowledge of the truth, that you may be sa-
ved. For their sakes, you are particularly remembered by
Your unknown but sincere friend
and servant in Christ,
G. W.
LETTER CXLIV
To the Rev. Mr. P.
Upper Marlborough (Maryland) Dec. 8, 1739.
Rev. and dear Sir,
TILL now, I have neither had leisure nor freedom to
answer your kind letter. Blessed be God, who has
opened the hearts of some of his people at New York to receive
the word. May he enable you to water what his own right
hand hath planted, and grant to your labours a divine increase!
Indeed I wish you good luck in the name of the Lord. I
wish all his servants were prophets. Oh that he would be
pleased to send forth experimental labourers into his harvest:
—for I fear amongst you, as well as in other places, there
are many who are well versed in the doctrines of grace, hav-
ing learned them at the university, but notwithstanding are
heart-hypocrites, and enemies to the power of godliness.
Dear Sir, I use this freedom, because I love simplicity. I con-
fess I am but a child in grace, as well as years. Pardon this
freedom, for out of the fullness and sincerity of my heart my
pen writes. — I thank your son and dear Mr. S. for
what they did on my account. Alas, I fear they think too
highly of me. Oh dear Sir, entreat the God of all grace to
give me humility, so shall success not prove my ruin. My
most cordial respects and hearty thanks attend dear Mrs.
P., I pray God in all things to make her a help meet
for you—As fast as I can snatch a few moments from public
business, more New York friends may expect to hear from me
—A sense of their favours is still upon my heart—I would
willingly remember them, whenever I go in and out before
the Lord. Mr. N.'s letter, and my next journal, will
acquaint you, how the Lord Jesus has been getting him-
self the victory, since I left New York. There has been
such little opposition, that I have been tempted almost to cry
out, "Satan, why sleepest thou?" But God pities my weak-
ness. Oh, dear Sir, thank him in my behalf, for indeed he deals
most lovingly with, Rev. Sir,
Your most unworthy brother and fellow-labourer,
G. W.
LETTER CXLV
Dear Sir, Upper Marlborough, Dec. 8, 1739.
I Cannot defer writing to dear Mr. N any longer.
—This afternoon God brought us hither. Some are
solicitous for my staying here to-morrow. As it seems to be
a call from providence, I have complied with their request. Oh
that I may be enabled to lift up my voice like a trumpet, and
to speak with the demonstration of the spirit and with power.
These parts are in a dead sleep. At Annapolis, I preached twice,
and spoke home to some ladies concerning the vanity of their
false politeness. But alas, they are wedded to their Quadrille
and Ombre, The minister of the place was under convic-
tions—He wept twice, and earnestly begged my prayers. He
will not frighten people I believe with harsh doctrine,—
he loves to prophesy smooth things.— God blessed the word
wonderfully at Philadelphia, I have great reason to think
many are brought home to God. When I return, it will
then be seen, who has received the word into an honest and
good heart. By the divine assistance, I propose revisiting Phil-
adelphia, New York, and to go as far as Boston, and so return
to Georgia, before I take shipping again for England. The
Lord direct my going in his way! About May you may ex-
pect to see me. My dear friend, pray that I may so improve
the time of my absence, that at my return my progress may be
made known to all men. It shames me to see what little pro-
ficiency I have made in the school of Christ. If I do not
begin to press forwards, how shall I appear before my blessed
Lord? I feel myself to be the chief of sinners; surely never
was a greater instance of redeeming distinguishing love. God
forbid that I should glory in anything but free grace: had
not God plucked me as a brand out of the fire, I had now
either been given over to a reprobate mind, or cast into a place
of torment. Oh help me, help me, dearest Mr. N,
help me to be thankful, and accept my thanks, though late,
for all favours received when at New York. Indeed I love you
in the bowels of our dear Lord Jesus. Salute your dear
wife my kind hostess: exhort her to be severely kind to her
little boy.—My most cordial respects attend all who ask after
me. Entreat them to continue their prayers, dearest Mr.
N____, for
Your weak, but affectionate friend, brother
and servant in Christ,
G. W.
LETTER CXLVI
To Mr. B .
Dear Sir, Upper Marlborough. Dec. 8, 1739.
GRATITUDE obliges me to send you a letter of thanks
for your last kind present, and all other favours; but the
love of our Lord Jesus Christ constrains me to write to
you, exhorting you earnestly to contend for the faith once de-
livered to the saints. I humbly hope the Lord has been
pleased to bless my coming in these parts to many, and
amongst them to you also. It rejoiced me to find dear Mr,
B was convinced that I preached the truth as it is in
Jesus. It pleased me exceedingly, to find how his eyes were
opened to see the direct contrariety there is, between the spi-
rit of Christ and the spirit of the world. What has my
dear friend now to do, but to prosecute these convictions,
and never rest till they end in a sound conversion. God has
given you richly all things to enjoy. Be persuaded hence-
forward not to be so cumbered about the many trifles of this
life, as to neglect the one thing needful, Dare, Sir, to be sin-
gularly good. Oh dare to let your light shine before men—
be not ashamed of Christ and his gospel. Come out from
your carnal acquaintance, and live as becomes a true follower
of our Lord Jesus. Dear Mr. B— , I hope will join
with you. God's spirit has been and is now striving with his
heart. I pray God to make this the accepted time, and cause
it to be the day of his salvation. How will it fill me with
joy at my return to Philadelphia, to see dear Mr, B—
and some other excellent well-meaning people, whom I love,
become despised followers of the Lamb of God. If my prayers
may be any ways assisting, as God shall enable me you may
depend on them—Our dear friend ——— can inform you
what God has done for us, since we saw you. One favour
more I beg of you;
give thanks as well as pray for
Your most obliged friend and servant,
G. W.
LETTER CXLVII
To Captain B—
Williamsburg, (Virginia) Dec. 15, 1739.
Hither God brought us last night; I trust the same
gracious being, by His good providence, has conducted
you safe to Philadelphia. I cannot say, I have met with so
much as even an almost Christian, since I parted from you,
till I came to Colonel Whiting's— There, God put in my
way a planter, that is seeking to know the way of God more
perfectly—He is now with us, and I hope our conversation
will be blessed unto him. Oh dear Mr. B—, strive, I
beseech you by the mercies of God in Christ Jesus, strive
to enter in at the strait gate. God of late has loudly called
you—Take heed that neither the lust of the eye, the lust of
the flesh, nor the pride of life prevail on you to lie down in a
carnal security again. I am confident you will be most hear-
tily despised, if you are a real Christian; but dear Mr. B—'s
resolution will be built on a better foundation, than to let
a little breath blow it down. In Christ is your strength;
look up to Him day by day, and as your day is, so shall your
strength be. I fear and pray for you. God only knows,
how often you have been upon my heart. We have not failed
interceding for you at the throne of grace. I shall be much
mistaken, if Mr. B does not prove a Christian indeed.
About May I propose, God willing, to be with you again.
Then I shall rejoice to sit and hear you tell what God has
done for your soul—Be not afraid of conviction. Be not
afraid of inward feelings. Now pray to the Lord Jesus, to
lay the axe of mortification to the root of your heart. Make
thorough work with it. Do not spare yourself in the least.—
Now is the accepted time, and that it may be the day of sal-
vation, is the earnest prayer of, dear Mr. B—,
Your obliged affectionate friend and servant in Christ,
G. W.
LETTER CXLVIII
To the Rev. Mr. G—T—.
My dear Brother, Williamsburg, Dec. 15, 1739.
Be not angry because you have not heard from me. In-
deed I love and honor you in the bowels of Jesus
Christ. You are seldom out of my thoughts; but until now
I have not had liberty given me, to send you a line— I trust
the work goes on gloriously in your parts. The hand of the
Lord brought wondrous things to pass, before we left Penn-
sylvania; but in these parts Satan seems to lead people captive at
his will. The distance of the plantations prevents people's as-
sembling themselves together.—Here are no great towns, as in
other provinces, and the commonalty is made up of Negroes
and convicts, and if they pretend to serve God, their masters,
Pharaoh-like, cry out, "Ye are idle, ye are idle." Last night
I read the affecting account of your brother John; let me die,
O Lord, the death of that righteous man, and let my future
state be like his! O my dear friend, my brother, entreat the
Lord that I may grow in grace, and pick up the fragments
of my time, that not a moment of it may be lost. Teach
me, oh teach me the way of God more perfectly. Rebuke,
reprove, exhort me with all authority—I feel I am but a
babe in Christ, I long to know more of the holy Jesus. He
has manifested himself to my soul, both in a way of humil-
iation and exaltation. Since I saw you, both His rod and staff
have comforted me. At present, He makes me young and
lively as an eagle; I only wish I was more worthy to sub-
scribe myself
Your affectionate friend and servant in Christ,
G. W.
LETTER CXLIX
To Mrs. C.
Newton, Cape Fear, Dec. 28, 1739.
My dear Sister in Christ,
Just now we have been singing the hymn, which we
sung at Broad-oak; and as I generally do at such seasons,
I thought of that happy time wherein we sung it in your great
hall, it was a time much to be remembered, an anticipation,
I believe, of that blessed time when we all shall meet to sing
the song of the Lamb in the heavenly Jerusalem—For
the adoption of the spirit, if truly received, is the earnest of
our promised inheritance. We are sealed thereby to the day
of redemption, and therefore may give both men and devils
the challenge to separate us, if they can, from the love of
God which is in Christ Jesus our Lord—I am verily per-
suaded, that since I left you, all things have worked together
for your good. As I am traveling, often does my soul think
both of you and yours, and out of the fullness of my heart, do I
often pour forth this or such like petitions, "Dearest Lord, be
forever gracious to the household of !" My conscience
has smote me frequently, for not writing you a longer letter.
I send this to ask pardon, and to assure you how often you
and your daughters are upon my heart, when I go in and out
before the Lord—I long to hear how the Lord Jesus has
magnified His strength in your weakness. It would fill a
volume to tell His goodness and truth; and my base ingrati-
tude sometimes comes with such conviction upon my heart,
that I can scarce forbear getting off my horse, and humbling
myself by the wayside. Indeed, I am the chief of sinners, and
yet overflowing has the Lord Jesus been in His love.
You will hear more soon by the journal which will be sent.
Dear Mrs. C, my love to all.
Your affectionate though unworthy brother in Christ,
G. W.
LETTER CL
Reverend and dear Sir, Savannah, Jan. 16, 1740.
With much pleasure (though not till last week) I received
your kind affectionate letter. I thank you for it with
all my soul, and pray God to reward you for this, and all
other your works of faith and labors of love. You may de-
pend on my not being prejudiced against you or your bre-
thren, by any evil report. They only endear you to me more
and more; and were your enemies to represent you as black as
hell, I should think you were the more glorious in the sight
of heaven. Your sweet criticisms and remarks upon my
journal and sermons, were exceedingly acceptable, and very
just. I assure you, dear Sir, I am fully convinced of the doctrine
of election, free justification, and final perseverance. My
observations on the Quakers, were only intended for those par-
ticular persons with whom I then conversed. The tenets of
the Quakers in general about justification, I take to be false
and unscriptural. Your adversaries need take no advantage
against you, by anything I have written; for I think it every
minister's duty to declare against the corruptions of that church
to which they belong, and not to look upon those as true
members of their communion, who deny its public constitutions.
This is your case in Scotland, and ours in England.
I see no other way for us to act at present, than to go on
preaching the truth as it is in Jesus; and then if our brethren
cast us out, God will direct us to take that course which is
most conducive to His glory, and His people's good. I think
I have but one objection against your proceedings; "Your
insisting only on presbyterian government, exclusive of all other
ways of worshiping God." Will not this, dear Sir, necessarily
lead you (whenever you get the upper-hand) to oppose
and persecute all that differ from you in their church govern-
ment, or outward way of worshiping God? Our dear bro-
ther and fellow-laborer Mr. G T thinks this
will be the consequence, and said he would write to you about
it. As for my own part, (though I profess myself a minister
of the Church of England) I am of a catholic spirit; and if I
see a man who loves the Lord Jesus in sincerity, I am not
very solicitous to what outward communion he belongs. The
kingdom of God, I think, does not consist in any such thing.
These are my sentiments, dear Sir, and I write them out of
love—I am ashamed (because only a babe in Christ) to pre-
tend as it were to direct; but true friendship needs no apo-
logy. God is doing great things in America. My journal,
which I send over with this, will show you what He has done
already. Your welfare is much upon my heart, and as I am
enabled, I make mention of you in my prayers. Affairs of
the Orphan-house go on well. Some few, even here, love the
Lord Jesus. Oh, dear Sir, pray for us, and especially for
Your weak unworthy brother
and fellow-laborer in Christ,
G. W.
LETTER CLI
Savannah, Jan. 22, 1740.
Your last letter quite confounded me. What am I, that
I should be thus highly favored! I can only say, that
"Less than the least of all God's mercies," shall be my mot-
to still. I have experienced many inward trials, since I saw
you last. But I find they work continually for my good.
I rejoice in what our dear Lord Jesus has done for your soul,
may a double portion of His blessed spirit rest upon you; may
our glorious ever-blessed Emmanuel cause all His glory to pass
before you, and may you be filled with all the fullness of
God! Since my arrival here, I have received a sweet endear-
ing instructive letter from Mr. Ralph E—; I have an-
swered it, and told him you promised to write about the ne-
cessity of a catholic spirit. Dr. C also has favored
me with a loving epistle. I have received and read his sermons
since I saw you: they are acute and pointed, but I think not
searching enough by many degrees—My dear brother, I love
writers that go to the bottom—God willing, I hope to be
with you at the synod—But what think you? I am sometimes
doubting, whether I shall have sufficient matter given me to
preach upon. Methinks I hear you say, "O thou of little
faith! Wherefore dost thou doubt? As thy day is, so shall
thy strength be." Michael and the dragon, I hear, are car-
rying on war most bravely in England, I really believe we shall
not die, till we see the kingdom of God come with power.
The affairs of the orphan-house are in great forwardness. I
have much to say; but time and business will not permit.
Blessed be God, eternity is at hand, and then we shall have
time enough. I have read some of your books to my great
profit. I want to be taught the way of God more perfectly
all the day long. My tenderest respect await the brethren;
my dear fellow-travelers salute you—You are often remem-
bered both by them, and
Your affectionate though very weak and unworthy
brother, servant and fellow-laborer in Christ,
G. W.
LETTER CLII
To the Rev. Mr. C.
Rev. and dear Sir, Savannah, Jan. 24, 1740.
I received your kind, though undeserving letter, and now
snatch a few moments from my other avocations, in order
to send you a short answer. May God who knits the elect
in one communion and fellowship, sanctify our friendship and
correspondence to the stirring up each other to love and to
good works! —It pleased me to find you breathe so catholic a
spirit. — O that bigotry and party zeal were not so much as
once named among us, as becometh saints! Since Christ
is not divided in Himself, why should Christians be divided one
amongst another? Bigotry, I am sure, can never be the fruit
of that wisdom which cometh from above.—No, it is earthly,
sensual, and devilish. When I come to New England I shall
endeavor to recommend a universal charity amongst all the
true members of Christ's mystical body. Perhaps therefore,
the fields may be the most unexceptionable place to preach
in. You and your brethren, I am persuaded, will follow our
Lord even without the camp, and rejoice to bear His sacred
reproach. Assist me, dear Sir, in your prayers, that my com-
ing may be in the fullness of the gospel of peace—I shall come
only with my sling and with my stone.—If the Lord shall
be pleased so to direct me, that I may strike some self-right-
eous Goliaths to the heart, I know you will rejoice with
Rev. and dear Sir,
Yours most affectionately in the love of
our dear Lord Jesus,
G. W.
LETTER CLIII
To Mr. W. D.
Savannah, Jan. 31, 1740.
My dear Brother in Christ,
Blessed be God, for the good report I hear of your
zeal for our dear Emmanuel. Go on, I beseech you by the
mercies of God in Christ Jesus; go on, and I am persuaded
the pleasure of the Lord shall prosper in your hands. If I
am thrown aside as a broken vessel, so I see you and others
stirred up to carry on our dear Lord's kingdom, if my heart
does not deceive me, I shall rejoice, yea, and will rejoice.
God blesses the affairs of the orphan-house. The work is
large, but we have omnipotence for our support. —I believe I
shall take in near fifty children. God lets me see every day,
that He orders my goings. He visits me with inward trials;
but if I had not such thorns in the flesh, what would become
of me? Fear not to speak the truth; if driven out of England,
here is a noble range for you in America. At present I am
restrained; but I could not rest, without letting you have a
line from
Your most affectionate friend, brother, and servant,
G. W.
LETTER CLIV
To Mrs. D.
Dear Madam, Savannah, Jan. 31, 1740.
I rejoice to hear that you are likely to be cast out of
your mother's will only for following Christ. This
may be only the beginning of temptations. God, I believe,
out of love will try you to the utmost. You have drunk
deep of heavenly comforts; you must pledge our Lord in
His cup of sufferings. Those who saw Him on Mount Tabor
afterwards were with Him in the garden. But fear not—
The Lord is with you—Neither men nor devils shall hurt you.
The sweet communion we have had with God, and through
Him with one another, often comforts my soul. Who knows,
but that time may be again repeated? Indeed, I want words
as well as time to express with what thankfulness I desire to
subscribe myself, dear madam,
Your unworthy brother
and obliged servant in our common Lord,
G. W.
LETTER CLV
To Captain M.
Dear Sir, Savannah, Jan. 31, 1740.
I rejoice to hear of your good health, and take this oppor-
tunity of sending you Mr. Law's and Mr. Haliburton's life;
which I pray God to sanctify to your benefit and comfort. I
hope you will watch over your heart, and take care to keep
up those convictions, which God once put into your soul. I
am afraid for Mr. B. The world, the world I fear has got
hold of him. Dear Captain M—, I trust, will not desert
his Master.—I am sure he would die, rather than prove false
to an earthly prince.—Oh let him not desert his dear Re-
deemer's colours. Dear Sir, beg of God to root out of your
heart a desire for that honour which comes from man. Until dead
to the world you will not be alive to God. Honour, falsely
so called, has destroyed millions. That you may never be
carried away with, or ruined by it, is the hearty prayer of,
dear Sir,
Yours, &c.
G. W.
LETTER CLVI
To the Rev. Mr. W. T.
Savannah, Jan. 31, 1740.
My dear and honored Brother,
Blessed be God, who has pleasure in the prosperity
of his servants. I am abased to think what our all-gra-
cious Redeemer has done by my unworthy hands, and rejoice
to hear that He is working by yours. Oh that you may ex-
perience fresh anointings and teachings from above! Oh that
you may be strengthened by God's mighty power in the inner
man, and pull down Satan's strongholds daily. God willing,
I hope to be with you at the Synod. I find as yet I scarce
know anything; but if I give out of my little stock, I trust the
Lord will increase it, as He did the little lad's loaves and
fishes. My journal, which I have sent to Philadelphia, will
tell you what God has done in Maryland and Virginia. A
foundation of great things I believe is laying here. Oh pray
that a sense of his own littleness, may be given to
Your affectionate, though unworthy brother and
fellow-laborer in Christ,
G. W.
LETTER CLVII
My dear Sister, Savannah, Jan. 31, 1740.
I rejoice to hear that you are enabled to see not only the
freeness but eternal duration of God's grace. Till the
sinner is convinced of this, I am persuaded he can neither
work from a principle of true love, nor give Jesus Christ
the honor due unto His name. He must always be making
his salvation to depend partly at least on his own doings; "If I
do so and so, Jesus Christ will give me His grace." But can
any believer who knows himself, help confessing, that after he
had received grace, he should have finally fallen from it, had
the continuance of it depended on his own will? Indeed, my
dear Sister, nothing so much comforts my own soul as the
thought that God will never leave me nor forsake me; if He
does, it must be for my unworthiness: But on that account it
cannot be; for He never chose me on account of my unworthi-
ness. He loved me freely, He prevented me by His grace; He
chose me from eternity, He called me in time, and I am per-
suaded will keep me till time shall be no more. This con-
sideration makes my faith to work by love. Now, I can live
not merely upon my frames, which notwithstanding are blessed
things, but on the promises. Now, I can go on my way re-
joicing, and, amidst all dejections, lift up my head in prospect
of a certain and exceeding weight of glory. Though I fall,
I know I shall rise again; for he that is brought truly to be-
lieve on Jesus Christ, his faith shall never die. The Lord
Jesus will not suffer to be lost the purchase of His blood.
He knew for whom He died, and neither men nor devils shall
ever pluck them out of His hand. Those who have been taught
most of God, I find, are thus minded. And I am persuaded
were the effects of our Lord's redemption to depend on a
man's own compliance, or was the continuance of God's grace
to depend solely on man's improvement, Jesus Christ would
have died in vain. Adam could not stand in paradise when
left to his own free-will, how then can we? No, blessed be
God, our salvation is put into better hands than our own.
Jesus Christ has purchased not only wisdom, righteousness,
and sanctification, but also eternal redemption for us. Let
this thought, my dear Sister, lift up our hands when they
hang down, and strengthen our feeble knees; God's gifts and
callings are without repentance. There is no condemnation to
them that are truly in Christ Jesus. And I write thus pe-
remptorily to you, because I find now you are able to bear it.
Blessed be God! my dear Sister, flesh and blood has not re-
vealed this unto you. I hope ere long our brethren will lay
all carnal reasoning aside, and see and preach the truth in this
respect, as it is in Jesus. My kindest love to your sister.
What I write to one, I write to both. The Lord direct your
going in His way, and cause you to continue instant in prayer
for
Your weak brother and servant in Christ,
G. W.
LETTER CLVIII
To Mrs. Elizabeth W.
My dear Sister, Savannah Jan. 31, 1740.
I have just been reading over your letter, and felt a sweet
sympathy with the writer. Oh that it may increase till we
are filled with all the fullness of God! Some passages in your
letter were dangerous to my soul. Whenever you see any
growth of grace, pray that I may grow in humility in particular.
Oh that I was lowly in heart! Honor and dishonor, good
report and evil report would then be alike, and prove a fur-
therance to me in my Christian cause. I believe the time is
shortly coming in which I am to endure something for my
Lord and Master; then will I cry out, Who is on the Lord's
side? Nothing supports me under a prospect of a trying time, so
much as a sense of God's everlasting love. I am persuaded,
that neither men nor devils shall ever pluck me out of His
Almighty hands. Let this support you, my dear Sister, in your
change of life. Wherever you are, I am confident you will
have reason to say, "Surely God is in this place." That
you may walk stronger and stronger, and ripen daily for glory,
is the hearty prayer of
Your affectionate brother and servant in our dear Emanuel,
G. W.
LETTER CLIX
To Mr. J. N.
Dear Sir, Savannah, Jan. 31, 1740,
I hope you will excuse my not answering your kind letter
sooner. The many avocations that at present surround me
prevented it. I rejoice to hear that our Lord Jesus is getting
himself the victory in the hearts of poor sinners. I hope many
will now rejoice in His salvation. One good sign is, that He
has employed the meanest, as well as vilest wr&ch, that He
ever yet sent forth. When I hear that any good is done by
my unworthy hands, it almost makes me to blush. Oh that
I could humble myself in the dust, that the Lord alone may
be exalted in His strength. I purpose to revisit New York at
the appointed time. You told me, "Our Lord has not sent
me into His vineyard at my own charge." Indeed, I always
find He furnishes me with things convenient. Nay, He is often
so abundant in goodness and truth, that I am obliged to cry
out in holy admiration, "My Lord and my God!" Dear
Sir, help me to be thankful. Blessed be God, the Orphan-
house affairs succeed well. Many souls will be redeemed by
it from temporal, and I trust, from eternal bondage. I have
taken in upwards of twenty children already, and I take in
more daily. I am building a large house, have many
servants, and a good flock of cattle. It will cost much money.
But our Lord will see to that. My friends at New York
will assist me when I come amongst them. Oh that my com-
ing may be in the fullness of the blessings of the gospel of peace!
I am persuaded, you will not be wanting in your prayers on
behalf of, dear Sir,
Your obliged friend and servant in Christ Jesus,
G. W.
LETTER CLX
To Mrs. Elizabeth D.
My dear Sister in Christ, Savannah, Feb. 1, 1740.
I generally observe that whom the Lord loves, for the most
part He keeps from preferment. Your grandmother
cannot do any more than she is permitted. It is God's free
grace alone, that has made the difference between us and
others. Oh that we were duly sensible of electing love! In-
deed it must necessarily constrain us to obedience. I am glad
you like Boehme. His works are truly evangelical and afford
sweet nourishment to the new-born soul. The nearer we
come to God, the better we shall relish searching books. It
is an evident sign of a false heart, when it is unwilling to be
probed. Blessed be God, you are not thus minded. I trust
the Lord Jesus has apprehended you, and will henceforward
never let you go. Oh that I may hear of your growth in grace,
and of your zeal for the Lord of Hosts. You do well to
go about doing good; your Master did so before you. Dare,
dear Miss, to follow His good example, and never fear the re-
vilings of men. Set your face as a flint against all the adver-
saries of our Lord; for shortly you shall tread all your ene-
mies under feet. I beseech you by the mercies of God in
Christ Jesus our Savior, to keep up a close walk and com-
munion with God. Nothing else can preserve you from
Idols; and you know when once the soul is off its watch, the
devil makes sad ravages in it. There is nothing I dread more
than having my heart drawn away by earthly objects. When
that time comes, it will be over with me indeed; I must then
bid adieu to zeal and fervency of spirit, and in effect, bid the
Lord Jesus to depart from me. For alas, what room can
there be for God, when a rival has taken possession of the
heart? Oh my dear Sister, pray that no such evil may befall
me. My blood runs cold at the very thought thereof. I
cannot, indeed; I cannot away with it. In a multiplicity of
business, have I wrote you these lines. I thank you for your
kind letter, and hope I shall always retain a grateful sense of
the many favors I have received from your dear family. My
kindest respects attend your sister; I long to hear of her being
brought into the glorious liberty of the children of God.
How does your father? Oh that he may have a well-grounded
interest in Christ! How does my dear brother Charles? I
pray God to fill him with all joy and peace in believing. And
how does your little sister? Dearest Redeemer, keep her un-
spotted from the world! My heart is now full. Writing
quickens me. I could almost drop a tear, and wish myself,
for a moment or two, in England. But hush, nature: God
here pours down his blessings on
Your sincere friend and servant in Christ,
G. W.
LETTER CLXI
To the Rev. Mr. D. R.
Savannah, Feb. 4, 1740.
I received your kind letter just on my arrival at this place.
My journal, which I suppose you will have read ere this
reaches Wales, can best inform you what God hath done for
my own and other people's souls. Even here, He is pleased
to be with and assist us. The Orphan-house goes on bravely.
I believe I shall take in near fifty children before I return to
England. He that feedeth the young ravens which call
upon Him, will not suffer them to want. I rejoice to hear
that the Lord Jesus is so publicly confessed among your
countrymen. If the Lord is pleased to send me, I shall gladly
take a tour into Wales. In this time of retirement, I expect
many inward conflicts. How otherwise shall I be prepared
for future mercies? Experience of God's work upon our own
souls is the best qualification to preach it effectually to others.
In about two months I take another tour around America. The
Gospel, I believe, will come with power in these parts. I ex-
pect to suffer in the flesh for what hath been done already:
But what have we to do with the consequences of performing
our duty? Leave them to God. Oh, my dear brother, pray
for me that my faith fail not, and then I care not what per-
secution befalls
Your weak unworthy brother in Christ,
LETTER CLXII
To Mr. H. H.
My dear Brother, Savannah, Feb. 4, 1740.
Will this find you in prison or not? Your last letter
(which I received upon my arrival here) gave me
some expectations that ere long you would be both in prison
and bonds. By and by, I shall follow perhaps. — The Lord
sanctify all his dispensations to us, and make us not only wil-
ling to be bound, but even to die for the sake of our dear
Master. When I read how my letters, &c., are blessed to your
comfort, it quite confounds me. Oh the free grace of
Christ Jesus our Lord! My dear Brother, let us continue
instant in season and out of season. — Let us continually preach
up free grace, though we die for it; we cannot lose our lives
in a better cause. As I am enabled, I remember you at the
throne of grace; in general, I sigh out my prayers. — But the
spirit, I trust, makes intercession for me with groanings that
cannot be uttered.
I have not had much enlargement in preaching since I have
been here; but my heart is often weighed down, and torn to
pieces with a sense of my desperately wicked and deceitful
heart. I can subscribe to what you say, "Was God to leave
me to myself, I should be eminent for, and a ring-leader in
sin." I sometimes think my heart is more vicious and per-
verse than anyone's; and yet Jesus Christ will come and
dwell in me. — Methinks I hear you say, "Glory be to free
grace: All praise be given to electing love." — Let all that
love the Lord Jesus say, Amen! Pray write to me as often
as possible. — God, I believe, is laying a foundation for
great things in Georgia. I am building a large house, and
taking in many children. Wrestle with God on behalf
of, Brother,
Yours eternally in Christ Jesus,
G. W.
LETTER CLXIII
To Mr. H —
Savannah, Feb. 4, 1740.
How is it with your heart? I hope the Lord Jesus
leads you on from conquering to conquer, and gets
himself the victory every day. I cannot but think that here-
after great things will be done in America. God seems to
have given some earnests of it already. My next journal will
acquaint you what they are. It often pleases me to reflect
how Christ's kingdom is securely carried on in spite of men
and devils, and that too by the weakest instruments in different
parts of the world. Surely we shall unite at last, and that
glorious time will come, when, with one heart and with one
voice, we shall sing praises to Him who sitteth upon the throne
forever. A glorious epiphany, I trust, will shortly be made
in the hearts of many souls. My dearest Brother, let us do
or suffer anything, so we may be made instruments of begin-
ning and carrying on so divine a work. As for my own part,
I often stand astonished at the riches of free distinguishing
grace, and I often feel myself so great a sinner, that I am
tempted to think, nothing can be blessed which comes
from such unhallowed hands and lips; but yet the Lord is
with me, and attended His word with mighty power on Christmas
day. Pray remember me to all friends. I expect you will re-
ceive the letters I sent from Philadelphia, ere this comes to
hand. I depend on seeing your journal, and hope you will
accept of my most cordial love from, dearest Brother,
Yours eternally in Christ Jesus,
G. W.
LETTER CLXIV
To Mr. H. G.
My dear Brother, Savannah, Feb. 4, 1740.
What shall I say to your kind letter? I bless the
Lord for awakening you to see the necessity of
trusting in a better righteousness than your own, and I adore
Him for making use of so mean an instrument as I am. It
is a plain proof that the power is not of man, but of God
alone. Labour, dear Sir, to keep up these convictions in
your heart. Now God has called you, take care of lying
down again. — Be always trimming your lamp, as though you
were in expectation every moment to meet the heavenly Bride-
groom. — Search more and more into the corruption of your
heart, and never rest till God's spirit witnesseth with your
spirit, that you are a child of God. Let the deadness of those
around you, excite your zeal. See that you are a burning
and a shining light in the midst of such a crooked and per-
verse generation. — And let a sense of God's distinguishing
love to you above others, excite you to distinguish yourself
by your obedience; still remembering that the Lord Jesus
is our whole and everlasting righteousness. That we both
may be found in Him, is the hearty prayer of
Your sincere friend and servant in Christ,
G. W.
LETTER CLXV
To the Rev. Mr. F___.
Reverend and dear Sir, Savannah, Feb. 29, 1740.
WITH great pleasure I answer your kind letter, and
earnestly pray that God would be pleased to sanctify
our correspondence. It rejoices my soul, when I find a cler-
gyman that loves our Lord Jesus in sincerity. It is with
regret that I speak against any of the sacred function; but
when their preaching and walk are directly contrary to the
gospel of our Lord Jesus, I cannot but speak to them, as
well as to the laity. To the best of my knowledge, I preach
the truth as it is in Jesus, and simply aim at bringing souls
to him. Blessed be his free grace for the success he hath been
pleased to give me. Not unto me, not unto me, but unto
his holy name be all the glory! Daily I am convinced, that
God's hand is not shortened—He blesses me here as well as
elsewhere. The Orphan-house is in great forwardness. I
feed near a hundred mouths daily, and am assured I serve a
God who will supply all our wants. It would rejoice me
to see you at Savannah, if your business will permit.—I can
now provide things convenient for your reception. —In about
six weeks I propose, God willing, to go northward. —If you
can, pray favour me with your company before that time.
My friends will rejoice to hear and see you.—They join with
me in affectionate respects to yourself and Mrs. F. I
have sent you a few little tracts, and long for opportunities to
convince you, reverend and dear Sir, how sincerely I subscribe
myself
Your affectionate brother and fellow-labourer in our
dear Lord Jesus,
G. W.
LETTER CLXVI
To Captain H. M.
Dear Sir, Savannah, March 2, 1740.
WITH pleasure I received your kind letter last night,
and immediately prayed, that God would never leave
you before he had finished the good work begun in your heart.
He has given you a rational, I hope ere long, he will give you
a spiritual conviction of sin and of Christ. When that comes,
all opposition will fall before it. The world will be as no-
thing in your eyes, and you will act like a soldier of Jesus
Christ. Indeed, dear Sir, I travail as it were in birth, till
Jesus Christ be thoroughly formed within you. If I do
not forget my promise, I do not forget your favours. —I
make mention of you in my prayers. Linger not, dear Sir,
but hasten out of your spiritual Sodom. Flee, flee to Jesus
Christ, whose sacred blood has made an atonement for sin-
ners. Lay hold on his everlasting righteousness, and choose
rather to suffer affliction with the people of God, than to en-
joy any thing which this world may afford, for a season.
Accept the sermons I have herewith sent, and believe me to
be, dear Sir,
Your affectionate friend and servant in Christ,
G. W.
LETTER CLXVII
To Mr. James S—-
Dear Mr. S., March 2, 1740.
BLESSED be God, that you are yet alive as to your
body; blessed be God, that some sparks of divine light
are yet discernible in your soul. Indeed, I have been frequent-
ly distressed for you and your companions, lest satan, through
the corruption of your hearts, and the deceitfulness of worldly
business, should get an advantage over you. Oh watch, my
dear friend, watch unto prayer; keep close to God through
a living faith in his dear Son; forget not your first love; for-
get not a bleeding God; forget not that time, when your soul
was about to take its last flight. O that I may meet you in
triumph at the last day! Providence thwarts my seeing you.
Adieu; write as often as you can. You have my prayers,
and as a token of my love, be pleased to accept this letter and
the books sent with it, from
Your affectionate friend and servant,
G. W.
LETTER CLXVIII
To the Hon. F. W.
Honoured Sir, Savannah, March 10, 1740.
YESTERDAY, after public worship, I received with
pleasure your kind letter, and was immediately ready
to cry out. Why do so many of my Lord's servants take
notice of such a dead dog as I am? Surely sovereign, rich,
and free grace was never exalted more than in the mercy
shown to me, who am in truth the unworthiest of the sons of
men. — Honoured Sir, it rejoices me to hear that there are so
many at New England, who love the Lord Jesus in sin-
cerity, and dare to shine as lights in the world amongst a
crooked and perverse generation. —I wish they may be all
Aquilla and Priscilla's to me, and teach me the way of God's
more perfectly; for I long to grow in grace, and in the know-
ledge of my Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ. Oh he is a
sweet master; even here do I feel his blessed influences, and
rejoice with joy unspeakable and full of glory. —He is often
with us in the midst of his sanctuary, and much succeeds the
Orphan-house.—I have digged low, and intend to build it
high, because I have a great God to pay the charges. I
have about thirty-six children which I maintain and clothe,
and have upwards of forty persons more who are employed in
the work. The plantation is in great forwardness.—Many
families are kept here by my employing them, and I hope to
see many a youth bred up for God; for I design to breed up
for the ministry, all that at any time I shall perceive to be re-
newed by the Holy Ghost, and endued with suitable natural
abilities. The work, I am persuaded, is of God, and I know
he will raise up instruments to support it. Let him choose
whom seemeth him good.—In about three months, God wil-
ling, I hope to be near, or at New England. I thank you from
my soul, honoured Sir, for your kind invitation; but, I be-
lieve, am pre-engaged to one Mr. S. D. The Lord re-
ward both him, and all others who receive me in his name! I
have not yet received the books, which you were pleased to
send me, because they are sent to the southward, but I expect
them daily, and doubt not of their being profitable. I know
not how to express my gratitude for your great condescension
in writing to me, but that I may always behave so as not to
be ashamed of subscribing myself
Your obliged humble servant,
G. W.
LETTER CLXIX
To the Rev. Mr. F. W.
Honoured Sir, Savannah, March 26, 1740.
SINCE I returned here, I received your letter and journal.
I thank you for both, and shall wait almost with im-
patience to see a continuance of your account of what God is
doing or has done amongst you. He knows my heart, I rejoice
in whatever God has done by your hands. I, prae, sequar,
et si non passibus equis.
I could now send a particular answer to your last; but, my
honoured friend and brother, for once hearken to a child, who
is willing to wash your feet. I beseech you by the mercies
of God in Christ Jesus our Lord, if you would have my
love confirmed towards you; write no more to me about mis-
representations wherein we differ. To the best of my know-
ledge at present, no sin has dominion over me, yet I feel the
strugglings of indwelling sin day by day; I can therefore by
no means come into your interpretation of the passage men-
tioned in the letter, and as explained in your preface to Mr.
Haliburton—The doctrine of election, and the final perseverance
of those that are truly in Christ, I am ten thousand times
more convinced of, if possible, than when I saw you last —
You think otherwise: why then should we dispute, when there
is no probability of convincing? Will it not in the end de-
stroy brotherly love, and insensibly take from us that cordial
union and sweetness of soul, which I pray God may always
subsist between us? How glad would the enemies of the Lord
be to see us divided? How many would rejoice, should I
join and make a party against you? And in one word, how
would the cause of our common master every way suffer by
our raising disputes about particular points of doctrines?
Honoured Sir, let us offer salvation freely to all by the blood of
Jesus; and whatever light God has communicated to us,
let us freely communicate to others. I have lately read the
life of Luther, and think it in no wise to his honour, that the
last part of his life was so much taken up in disputing with
Zwinglius and others; who in all probability equally loved the
Lord Jesus, notwithstanding they might differ from him in
other points. Let this, dear Sir, be a caution to us, I hope
it will to me; for by the blessing of God, provoke me to it
as much as you please, I do not think ever to enter the lists of
controversy with you on the points wherein we differ. Only
I pray to God, that the more you judge me, the more I may
love you, and learn to desire no one's approbation, but that of my
Lord and master Jesus Christ. Ere this reaches you,
I suppose you will hear of my late excursion to Charles Town,
A great work I believe is begun there. Enclosed I have sent
you Mr. Garden's letters—They will serve to convince you,
more and more, of the necessity you lie under to be instant in
season and out of season. Oh, dear honoured Sir, I wish you
as much success as your own heart can wish. Were you here,
I would weep over you with tears of love, and tell you what
great things God hath done for my soul, since we parted
last. Indeed and indeed, I often and heartily pray for your
success in the gospel: May your inward strength and outward
sphere increase day by day! May God use you as a choice
and singular instrument of promoting his glory on earth, and
may I see you crowned with an eternal and exceeding weight
of glory in the world to come! This is the hearty desire of,
honoured Sir,
Yours most affectionately in Christ Jesus,
G. W.
LETTER CLXX
To Mr. W.
Savannah, March 26, 1740.
AND how does dear Mr. J—F—? His letter lies by me,
and I now am inclined to answer it. My dear brother,
how do you feel your heart? Is it grown sick of original and
actual sin? Is it grown sick of unbelief and self-righteousness?
Is it closely united to the holy Jesus? Do you feed on him
in your heart by faith? And do you receive of his fullness day
by day? I ask these questions, because I want to see you write
of the inward life, and to hear you talk of your having a feeling
possession of your God. For he that believeth aright, hath the
witness within himself. How do the brethren? I hope there
is no more saying "I am of Paul," or "I am of Apollos,"
but that you are only desirous of being one in Christ. I
pray for, though distant from you. I believe I am preparing
a place for many. Our work goes on bravely. I have near
forty little ones now in my house. Some of them I trust will
be effectually wrought upon, and made Christians indeed. We
all live in love and unity, and most I hope are seeking after
Jesus Christ. He is pleased from time to time to manifest
himself to my soul, and to show me how unworthy I am of the
least mercy. Shortly I shall go northward, to preach the gos-
pel and collect fresh contributions for my orphans. God has
given me an earnest of what he will do in America, by the
large collection that was made at Charlestown — I live every
day in expectation of hearing from my London friends. My
brother, the captain, refreshed my soul with glad tidings and
letters from Bristol, God gave me great comfort and satis-
faction in conversing with him, and I hope he will be a Chris-
tian indeed. Adieu. All salute you and the brethren.
I am yours most affectionately in Christ Jesus,
G. W.
LETTER CLXXI
To the Rev. Mr. B. I.
Savannah, March 28, 1740.
HOW glad should I be of a letter from dear brother I—? When shall my soul be refreshed, with hear-
ing that the work of the Lord prospers in his hand? I sup-
pose before now you have received my letters, and seen my
journal, and I believe God is yet preparing great things for
us. Many at Charleston lately were brought to see their want
of Jesus Christ—Next week, God willing, I propose go-
ing to Philadelphia, and then perhaps may see England the
latter end of this year, or beginning of the next. The orphan-
house goes on bravely. I have forty children to maintain, be-
sides workmen and assistants — The great householder of the
world does, and will I am persuaded richly provide for us all.
The colony itself is in a very declining way. But our extre-
mity is God's opportunity—Our brethren I trust go forward
in the spiritual life, I have often great inward trials—Pray
that I may be kept in all changes, and seeming chances of
this mortal life. I believe it to be God's will that I should
marry. One, who may be looked upon as a superior, is abso-
lutely necessary for the due management of affairs. However, I
pray God, that I may not have a wife, till I can live as
though I had none—You may communicate this to some of
our intimates; for I would call Christ and his disciples to
the marriage. If I am deluded, pray that God would re-
veal it to
Your most affectionate brother and servant,
G. W.
LETTER CLXXII
To Mr. and Mrs. D.
On board the Savannah bound to Philadelphia from Georgia,
April 4, 1740.
My dear friends,
SINCE I wrote last, we have buried our Sister L.
Rachel I left at Philadelphia, and sister T seems to
be in a declining state; so that sister A alone is like
to be left of all the women who came over with me
from England. I find by experience, that a mistress is abso-
lutely necessary for the due management of my increasing fa-
mily, and to take off some of that care, which at present lies
upon me. Besides, I shall in all probability, at my next re-
turn from England, bring more women with me: and I find,
unless they are all truly gracious (or indeed if they are) with-
out a superior, matters cannot be carried on as becometh the
gospel of Jesus Christ. It hath been therefore much im-
pressed upon my heart, that I should marry, in order to have
a help meet for me in the work whereunto our dear Lord
Jesus hath called me. This comes (like Abraham's servant
to Rebekah's relations) to know whether you think your daugh-
ter, Miss E—, is a proper person to engage in such an
undertaking? If so; whether you will be pleased to give me
leave to propose marriage unto her? You need not be afraid of
sending me a refusal. For, I bless God, if I know anything of
my own heart, I am free from that foolish passion, which the
world calls love. I write, only because I believe it is the will
of God, that I should alter my state; but your denial will
fully convince me, that your daughter is not the person ap-
pointed by God for me. He knows my heart; I would not
marry but for him, and in him, for ten thousand worlds,
—But I have sometimes thought Miss E— would be
my help-mate; for she has often been impressed upon my
heart. I should think myself safer in your family, because so
many of you love the Lord Jesus, and consequently would
be more watchful over my precious and immortal soul. After
strong crying and tears at the throne of grace for direction,
and after unspeakable troubles with my own heart, I write this.
Be pleased to spread the letter before the Lord; and if you
think this motion to be of him, be pleased to deliver the en-
closed to your daughter — If not, say nothing, only let me
know you disapprove of it, and that shall satisfy, dear Sir and
Madam,
Your obliged friend and servant in Christ,
G. W.
LETTER CLXXIII
To Miss E—.
On board the Savannah, April 4th, 1740.
BE not surprised at the contents of this: —The letter sent
to your honoured father and mother will acquaint you
with the reasons. Do you think, you could undergo the fa-
tigues, that must necessarily attend being joined to one, who
is every day liable to be called out to suffer for the sake of Je-
sus Christ? Can you bear to leave your father and kindred's
house, and to trust on him, (who feedeth the young ravens
that call upon him) for your own and children's support, sup-
posing it should please him to bless you with any? Can you
undertake to help a husband in the charge of a family, con-
sisting perhaps of a hundred persons? Can you bear the incle-
mencies of the air both as to cold and heat in a foreign cli-
mate? Can you, when you have a husband, be as though
you had none, and willingly part with him, even for a long
season, when his Lord and master shall call him forth to
preach the gospel, and command him to leave you behind? If
after seeking to God for direction, and searching your heart,
you can say, "I can do all those things through Christ
strengthening me," what if you and I were joined together
in the Lord, and you came with me at my return from
England, to be a help meet for me in the management of the
orphan-house? I have great reason to believe it is the divine
will that I should alter my condition, and have often thought
you were the person appointed for me. I shall still wait on
God for direction, and heartily entreat him, that if this mo-
tion be not of him, it may come to nought.—I write thus
plainly, because, I trust, I write not from any other principles
but the love of God.—I shall make it my business to call on
the Lord Jesus, and would advise you to consult both him
and your friends. For in order to attain a blessing, we
should call both the Lord Jesus and his disciples to the mar-
riage—I much like the manner of Isaac's marrying with Re-
bekah, and think no marriage can succeed well, unless both
parties concerned are like-minded with Tobias and his wife. —I
think I can call the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob to witness
that I desire "to take you my sister to wife, not for lust, but
uprightly;" and therefore I hope he will mercifully ordain, if
it be his blessed will we should be joined together, that we may
walk as Zachary and Elizabeth did, in all the ordinances of the
Lord blameless. I make no great profession to you, because
I believe you think me sincere. The passionate expressions
which carnal courtiers use, I think, ought to be avoided by
those that would marry in the Lord. I can only promise, by
the help of God, "to keep my matrimonial vow, and to do
what I can towards helping you forward in the great work of
your salvation." If you think marriage will be any way pre-
judicial to your better part, be so kind as to send me a denial.
I would not be a snare to you for the world. You need not
be afraid of speaking your mind. I trust, I love you only for
God, and desire to be joined to you only by his command,
and for his sake. With fear and much trembling I write, and
shall patiently tarry the Lord's leisure, till he is pleased to in-
cline you, dear Miss E—, to send an answer to
Your affectionate brother, friend and servant in Christ,
G. W.
LETTER CLXXIV
To Mr. H.
On board the Savannah, April 10, 1740.
IT is now full time to answer your letter. You acknow-
ledge me the first instrument, under God (forever adored
be the riches of his free grace), of awakening you to the divine
life: and shall not I endeavour to quicken and inflame the
heavenly spark infused into your soul? God forbid! Oh, that
my power was equal to my will! How should my dear brother
H glow with divine love, and lean by faith on the bosom
of his dearest Redeemer! But I trust ere now you have indeed
received the Holy Ghost, and know what it is to feast on a
crucified Jesus. Does he not, my dear brother, often mani-
fest himself sweetly to your panting soul? Does he not often
teach you the hidden things of the kingdom of God? Does
he not tell you that he loves you, and will suffer nothing to
pluck you out of his almighty hand? Thus often is he pleased
to manifest himself to me: and who then dares despair? No;
I can assure the worst, the chief of sinners, that Jesus
Christ came to save them. My dear brother, here are glad
tidings of great joy! The fire kindles whilst I am musing.
Oh, let us call all to come and see Him, who has forgiven us,
all the sins that ever we committed. Is not this the Christ?
Adieu. My hearty and dearest love to all. Fail not writing to
Your affectionate friend and servant,
G. W.
LETTER CLXXV
To Mr. C.
My dear Brother, On board the Savannah, April 10, 1740.
YOU, as well as your dear associates, are much upon
my heart. I long to hear that you are advanced in
grace, and grown in the knowledge of Christ Jesus your
Lord. I say, "your Lord", for I hope, ere now, you can ap-
propriate Christ to yourself, and, without the least diffidence
or doubt, cry out assuredly, "My Lord and my God."
When the soul says this, then, but not till then, is it truly
married to the dear Lord Jesus; then are we true children
of the bridegroom, and are real partakers of the supper of the
Lamb. This, this is faith: this is believing; not with the
head; not in notion only; but with the heart, indeed and in
truth. The soul now puts its amen, and sets the seal to God's
everlasting promises; it now soars upwards towards heavenly
things, and feels continually the invisible realities of another
world. Though sometimes overshadowed by a cloud, yet still
it knows that its Redeemer liveth, and justifies the ungodly.
It cannot doubt of his favor, though sometimes he is pleased
to withdraw his sensible presence. The root of the matter is
twisted round every faculty of the soul, which daily is support-
ed with this assurance, that Christ can no more forsake the
soul he loves, than he can forsake himself. Oh, my dear bro-
ther, I find myself much carried out to write of that divine
life, that divine mystery of godliness, the hidden kingdom of
God in the heart. If anything I can say, or do, or write,
may be any way serviceable to dear Mr. C—, it will much re-
joice
His most unworthy brother and servant in Christ,
G. W.
LETTER CLXXVI
To Mr. I__ B__.
On board the Savannah, April 10, 1740.
My dear, dear Friend,
I remember your words that day I took my leave of you,
with Dr. John S__, at London. I have not forgotten
you, therefore do I now write a line to my dear Mr. B__.
May the Holy Ghost come upon him, and the power of the
Highest overshadow him; and may our glorious Redeemer
never cease striving with him, till he hath a witness within
himself that he is a true child of God. Oh, when will you
answer the character of your namesake and forefather Jacob?
When, like him, will my dear friend give himself up a whole
burnt-offering unto the Lord! May I hear that you have
recovered your first love, and are, as formerly, zealous of
good works! I think I never yet really doubted of your return.
If prayers to God, if entreaties to him, can bring my dear friend
back, he shall not be led away captive by the world; he shall,
he shall be a Christian indeed. I long to see you, and till then
shall wrestle with strong cryings and many tears with my dear
Lord Jesus, on your behalf. I feel, I feel Christ's love;
I can no more doubt of my interest in him, than I can of the
shining of the sun at noonday. He fills, he sweetens and
gladdens my soul; he loves me freely: he will bring me to
behold his glory. I think I could now bid to men and devils
defiance. Who is he that condemneth? It is Christ that
justifies, who even now sitteth in heaven to make intercession
for me. You see, my dear friend, I am upon the mount. I
know not how to stop. It is true, I must come down; but it
is only that I may go up again, and take a view of the heavenly
Canaan. I am now near the port whither we are bound:
yet a little while, and I shall be in heaven; and shall I not meet
my dear J— there? God forbid! No, no; I cannot bear the
thought of it. Away, my dear, dear brother, to Jesus
Christ. Lay hold on his everlasting righteousness: look,
look unto him by faith, and be saved. Call your dear wife
to look also. Help, oh help her in the great work of her sal-
vation; and breed up your dear child in the nurture and
admonition of the Lord. Adieu. My heart is full. With
sincerity I subscribe myself
Yours most affectionately in our dearest,
dearest Lord Jesus,
G. W.
LETTER CLXXVII
To Mr. N__.
My Dear Brother, On board the Savannah, April 10, 1740.
I have been a few days returned from Charles-Town, where
our dear Lord Jesus, I trust, has begun a glorious work.
Many came to me under convictions, and were made to cry
out, "What shall we do to be saved?" The people were
exceeding desirous of my return amongst them. If I call there,
as I come northward, it may prevent my being at New-York
so soon as was proposed. The Lord direct my going in his
way. A Fosterian Preacher lost ground there. I think you are
not much to be blamed for going out of church; but perhaps
it might be better, on another such occasion, to hear the whole
discourse, and then go and converse with the preacher upon
it; otherwise a man may say, you are angry, and could not
judge, because you did not hear all. Praise is more dangerous
than contempt: but when our Lord's honor can be promot-
ed by the display of our graces, we need not fear. His grace
will be sufficient for us. I know not what person it is that
you would not have me be so open to, unless it be Mr. .
I had rather be too open than too reserved. Simplicity much
becomes the flock of God. A few days past, with full assur-
ance of faith, I laid the first brick of our great house; Jeremiah
bought land when the people were leading into captivity. My
family daily increase, and, blessed be God, as yet I am kept
from doubting. Pray that my faith may never fail. Some of
the Germans in America are holy souls, and deserve the cha-
racter they bear. They keep up a close walk with God, and
are remarkable for their sweetness and simplicity of behavior.
They talk little, and think much. Most of them, I believe,
are Lutheran. But where there is the image of my dear Mas-
ter, there are my affections drawn. This is the catholic spirit
you breathe after: the Lord, I am persuaded, will give it to
your soul. All that people do say of me, affects me but little;
because I know worse of myself than they can say concerning
me. My heart is desperately wicked. Was God to leave
me, I should be a remarkable sinner. But redeeming love, I
believe, will not let us go. Oh! dear Mr. N, pray, and give
thanks for me. I daily taste that the Lord is gracious. All
things go on well. My dear brethren salute you, as does
Your affectionate, unworthy brother and servant in Christ,
G. W.
LETTER CLXXVIII
To Mr. S__.
Willington, (Pennsylvania) April 14, 1740.
READ where I am, and judge whether or not I am a
stranger and pilgrim upon earth. Yesterday, after a
short passage of ten days, did God bring us from Georgia to
New-Castle: there I preached twice. Today I shall preach
here, and in the evening hope to reach Philadelphia. People
are much alarmed already; and great things, I find, God has
been pleased to do, by what he enabled me to deliver when
last here. Two ministers have been convinced of their formal
state, notwithstanding they held and preached the doctrines
of grace. One plainly told the congregation he had been de-
ceiving himself and them, and could not preach any more,
but desired the people to pray with him. Another is as a flame
of fire, and hath been much owned of God. An opposer read-
ing my sermon, in order to convince them I did not preach as
Mr. T__, was much disappointed; for power went along
with the sermon, God's spirit fell on the people, and formal
opposers went affrighted away. It is unknown what a glo-
rious stir here is in the province. Many, very many, I be-
lieve, of late have been brought savingly to believe on the
Lord Jesus. The work much increases, and here is employ-
ment for many months: but I must return shortly to Savan-
nah. A primitive spirit revives; and many, I hope, will be
brought to live steadfast in the apostles' doctrine, in fellow-
ship, and in breaking of bread, and in prayers. Perhaps dear Mr. S__
may be one of them. Pray how does that young man do? Is
he deeply humbled, and closely united to the dear Lord
Jesus? Does he feel himself a poor sinner, and daily experi-
ence the outgoing and incoming of the blessed spirit in the
sanctuary of his heart? Blessed be God, I do: even whilst I am
writing I feel his power. I am persuaded I shall be more than
conqueror over every evil, through my Redeemer's love. Oh!
my dear friend, keep close to the dear Lord Jesus! Do not
go without his leading, and then you are safe, though in the
midst of devils. Adieu.
Ever, ever yours,
G. W.
LETTER CLXXIX
To Madam C___.
Madam, New Brunswick, April 27, 1740.
ALL things go on well in America—nay, better than I
dare ask, or could think. Our Lord's kingdom comes
with power. It is amazing to see how God is present in our
assemblies: I refer you to dear brother S__ for particulars.
My animal spirits are exhausted, but I am filled within. Na-
ture would sometimes cry out, "Spare thyself;" but when I
am offering Jesus to poor sinners, I cannot forbear exerting
all my powers. Oh that I had a thousand lives! my dear
Lord Jesus should have them all. I long to be out of the
body, that I may love and serve him as I would: but I must
suffer before I can reign with him. That you and I may never
deny our Lord, is the earnest prayer of, Madam,
Your obliged humble servant,
G. W.
LETTER CLXXX
To Mr. M___.
New Brunswick, April 28, 1740.
BLESSED be God, I can send you glad tidings of great
joy. Our Lord Jesus is getting himself the victory in
these parts. The Orphan-house affairs go forward beyond
expectation. I have upwards of fifty children in my house at Sa-
vannah, with seventy persons in family, and upwards of a hundred
people to provide for every day. As yet we want for nothing.
The great householder of mankind gives us all things richly to
enjoy, and, I am persuaded, will provide for us whilst we trust
in him. I had rather live by faith, and depend on God for
the support of my great, and yet increasing family, than to have
the largest visible fund in the universe. About five weeks ago
the Lord stirred up the Charles-Town people to contribute up-
wards of seventy pounds sterling towards the support of my
little ones. A glorious work was also begun in the hearts
of the inhabitants; and many were brought to cry out,
"What shall we do to be saved?" A fortnight ago, after a
short passage of ten days, I landed in Pennsylvania, and have had
the pleasure of seeing and hearing, that my poor endeavours
for promoting Christ's kingdom, when there last, were not
altogether vain in the Lord. I cannot well tell you how many
have come unto me, labouring under the deepest convictions,
and seemingly desirous of finding rest in Jesus Christ. Se-
veral have, I humbly hope, actually received him into their
hearts by faith, and have not only righteousness and peace, but
also joy in the Holy Ghost. In short, the word has run and
been much glorified; and many Negroes also are in a fair way
of being brought home to God. I daily receive fresh and
most importunate invitations to preach in all the adjacent coun-
tries. God is pleased to give a great blessing to my printed
Sermons: they are now in the hands of thousands in these
parts, and are a means, under God, of enlightening and
building up many in their most holy faith. Since such an ef-
fectual door is opened for preaching the everlasting gospel, you
will not be surprised if I acquaint you there are many adver-
saries. The Clergy, I find, are greatly offended at me. The
commissary of Philadelphia, having got a little stronger party
than when I was there last, has thrown off the mask, denied
me the pulpit, and last Sunday preached up an historical
faith, and justification by works. But people only flock the
more to me. The power of God is more visible than ever in
our assemblies; and more than ever before are convinced that
I preach the doctrine of Jesus Christ. Some few bigoted
self-righteous Quakers also, now begin to spit out a little of the
serpent: they cannot bear the doctrine of original sin, or of
imputed righteousness as the cause of our acceptance with God.
One calls original sin "original nonsense;" and several have
been to me, under the apprehension of being thrust out, for
owning and confessing what I take to be the truth as it is in
Jesus. God has now brought me to New Brunswick, where
I am blessed with the conversation of Mr. G— T—. Indeed
he is a good soldier of Jesus Christ, and God is pleased in a
wonderful manner to own both him and his brethren. The
congregations where they have preached have been surpris-
ingly convicted and melted down. They are unwearied in doing
good, and go out into the highways and hedges to compel poor
sinners to come in. Yesterday also I heard of two ministers
in Long Island, near New-York, who had large communica-
tions from God, and have been instrumental in bringing many
souls to Christ. I could add more; but I must away: the
people are waiting for a spiritual meal. They fly to the doc-
trine as doves to the windows, and I trust the Lord is
now reviving his work in the midst of the years. With
great difficulty I have redeemed time to send you these few
lines. I hope you and the rest of my dear friends continue to
pray for me: for I believe never was so weak a wr&ch sent on
such an important errand. But when I am weak, then am I
strong. My bodily strength, by frequent journeying and con-
tinued speaking, sometimes fails me; but the Lord quickens
and strengthens me by his mighty power. The more I am
opposed, the more joy I feel; and the first fruits of God's
spirit, which he hath imparted to my soul, are so sweet, that
I almost with impatience wait till I reap a full harvest in the
fruition of my God. Continue, I beseech you, to intercede
for me; and rest satisfied that both you and my other English
friends are always remembered by
Yours,
G. W.

LETTER CLXXXI
To W.S. Esq,
My dear Brother, Reedy Island May 19, 1740.
Know very well what it is to part from a friend which is
as one's own soul; and therefore could in some measure
sympathize with you in what you felt when parting from me.
The good Lord sanctify my friendship to you, and grant we
may go hand in hand to heaven. One of the enclosed papers
will show you the event of what you inserted (unknown to
me) in the News. However, be not disheartened; God shall
make even this to work together for your good. The war between
Michael and the dragon has much increased. Mr. C
has preached most of his people away from him. He lashed
me most bravely the Sunday before I came away. Mr. J
also preaches against me. Mr. C— did not come to take his
leave of me; and Mr. J— is very inveterate. Now I believe
our Lord's kingdom will come with power. At New-York
the word ran. Twice or thrice our Lord appeared for us in
a most glorious manner. Mr. T— and his brethren glow with
divine warmth; and I have conversed with one of the ministers
of Long Island, whom God has lately sent forth: he is a
sweet zealous soul. Last week, at Nottingham and Mr. ^—'s
how did God manifest his glory! We had about twelve
thousand hearers; and such a melting, such a crying, (they
say) was scarcely ever seen. Blessed be God, the devil's chil-
dren begin to throw off the mask. I want to draw the linger-
ing battle on. At Philadelphia affairs go on better and better;
only Satan now begins to throw many into fits. I have generally
preached twice and rode near thirty miles a day since you
left me. The Lord hath been my support, and has often so
melted me with a sense of his free, sovereign, and everlasting
love, that some thought I was giving up the ghost. Oh never
let go your sense of God's sovereign, everlasting love! It is
food to my poor soul. Was it not for that, surely I must sink
under the prospect of the labors and sufferings that are before
me. My dear brother, What is the church doing in these
parts? I believe the work will go on better here than in Eng-
land. We are more united in our principles, and do not print
one against another. Pray observe the hint given to Captain
G, and let the Lord order for me as it shall seem
good in his sight. We are now at Reedy Island waiting for a
wind. I heard of a ship going to Dublin, and could not lose
the opportunity of writing to my dear brother S——. I
need not remind you to hasten over as fast as possible—Our
Lord has taught you not to stay by the way—I have rebuked
Mr. C— sharply, and I trust have gotten some gracious
souls on board—The Lord is with me; I am somewhat bet-
ter as to bodily health, but I live chiefly on inward supplies
from above. My Master never fails me. Oh, exhort all to
fall in love with Jesus, and to pray for.
Ever yours in the best bonds,
G. W.
LETTER CLXXXII
To Mr. M ___, an Indian Trader.
Dear Mr. M ___, Ready Island, May 19, 1740.
I Received your letter, and have been reading part of your
journal. I think it your bounden duty to go amongst the
Indians again, not as a minister, but as a private Christian,
whose duty it is, when converted himself, to strengthen his
brethren. An effectual door, I would hope, is opening
amongst some of the heathen. I remember, when it was first
impressed upon me, that I should go to Georgia, this promise
came with such power as never will be forgotten, and that too,
long before I had any outward call
—" I have made thee the
head of the heathen."—I speak this for your encouragement,
but desire you would not mention it to others. Who knows
but that time may be now near at hand ? —However that be,
it is plain God calls you, and I wish you good success in the
name of the Lord. Be sure you keep a close walk with God.
—Be much in prayer, and prepare for the greatest hardships.
Your greatest perils will be amongst your own countrymen.
The heathens will be stirred up by them, as the Gentiles were
by the Jews; but the Lord Jesus will make you more than
conqueror over all. The word of the Lord will make its
own way. Beg of God to give you true notions of our free
justification by faith in Jesus Christ. Bring your Indian
hearers to believe, before you talk of baptism, or the supper of
the Lord. Otherwise they will catch at a shadow, and ne-
glect the substance. Improve the leisure you now enjoy,
and see that you feel the truths you speak. Feed on this promise,
"It shall be given you in that hour what you shall say."
Your circumstances call for a fulfilling of it — Tell them
what God has been doing here, and how happy Jesus
Christ will make them. Be sure tell them, tell them, that
true faith is not merely in the head, but in the heart, and that
it will certainly be productive of good works. Frequently
meditate on God's free love to yourself, and that will best
qualify you to speak of it affectionately to others. I could
say more, but time will not permit. Pray for me. All with
me salute you. My poor petitions you may depend on, as
the Lord shall enable me. My love to all, and believe me
to be
Your affectionate friend, brother, and servant in Christ,
G. W.
LETTER CLXXXIII
To the Allegany Indians.
My Dear Brethren, Reedy Island, May 21, 1740.
For so I call you, because you, and I, and all, have one
common father. One God, in whom we live, move and
have our beings We all came at first out of the dust of the
earth. For after God made the sun, moon, stars, and every
thing you see, he also made a creature called man, and breathed
into him the breath of life; he then became a living soul.
He could not only walk and speak, but he could also think,
and reason, and was full of goodness, peace, and joy. This
man, this happy creature God placed in a garden, which his
own right hand had planted. He then caused him to fall
asleep, and out of one of his ribs made what we call a woman,
that she might be his wife. Their names were Adam and
Eve. With these, God made an agreement that they should
eat of every tree of that garden, except one; but if they ate
the fruit of that particular tree, they should die; they should
return to the dust from whence they were taken, lose the
comforts they enjoyed in their souls, and be unhappy for ever
in another world. But if they did not eat this fruit, none of
these things should come upon them. A being, which we
call the devil, (and who for his pride had been cast out of hea-
ven) envying their happiness, tempted them to eat the forbidden
fruit. They consented, they ate, they died. Their bodies
became mortal, their souls were deprived of the presence and
love of God; and unless a way was found out to make
satisfaction for what they had done, they must have been lost
for ever. These were our parents, and God made this agree-
ment with us their children, as well as with them. For they
acted in our name, as a king acts in the name of his people,
or a father in the name of a child—What therefore befell
them, befell us. "We died in them; and come into this world
poor and miserable, blind and naked, as they were, when they
had eaten of the forbidden tree. Hence it is, that we are
given to lust, anger, envy, hatred, pride, and malice, and
all those troublesome passions which you all must feel in your
own hearts, and cannot but see even in the hearts of your chil-
dren. If then, you only look into yourselves, you must con-
fess these things are so. But God hath given us a book, where-
in he assures us of the truth of all this: — And we know that
book came from God, because none but God could tell us
the things therein contained. And I speak first of this, be-
cause till you feel and believe this, you cannot come to the
knowledge of Jesus Christ; and without the knowledge
of Jesus Christ you cannot be saved. For after our first
parents, Adam and Eve, had taken the forbidden fruit, and
with all their children, thereafter to be born, became guilty
before God, God out of his own free love sent his only be-
gotten Son into the world, to die, and so to make an atone-
ment for the sin of fallen man, and also to obey the law,
which man had broken; so that though fallen man had no
righteousness of his own, yet upon believing in God's Son,
he should find a perfect righteousness in him. This Son is
called Jesus, "A Saviour," because he was to save us from
the guilt and power of our sins. He was truly God,
and therefore could satisfy; he was truly man, and there-
fore could obey and suffer in our stead. He was God and
man in one person, that God and man might be happy to-
gether again. My dear brethren, (for so I must call you,
though I never saw you) these are strange things, but if
you are willing to learn, the Holy Spirit shall teach you. For
Jesus Christ by dying, and obeying God's law, hath
bought for us the Holy Spirit, who shall change your corrupt
natures, and fit you for happiness hereafter with the ever-blessed
God, if you do but believe in your hearts.—Thousands of
white people only believe in their heads, and therefore are no
more Christians than those who never heard of Jesus Christ
at all. They call Christ, "Lord, Lord," but they do
not live as Jesus Christ hath commanded. No, they curse
and swear, they break the Sabbath, they get drunk, they play,
they whore, they commit adultery, and have taught many poor
Indians to do these abominable things as well as themselves.
Do not you therefore learn of them. For true Christians are
sober, chaste and holy. They will not get drunk, they will
not play the whore, they will not cheat, lie, curse or swear;
but they will bless and praise God, keep the Sabbath, and do
all the good they can; for thus Jesus Christ, their Lord
and master, lived when he was here on earth. I say, when
he was here on earth; for after he died, he rose again, and
went up into heaven from whence he came, and there he sits
praying for all that shall believe on Him to the end of the
world. For as the world had a beginning, so it also will have
an end. And Jesus Christ will come again in the clouds to
judge all mankind; and then he that hath believed in Christ,
and hath shown forth his faith by his works, shall be saved;
and he that hath not believed in Christ, shall be damned for
ever, and be cast into a lake of fire and brimstone. But be-
fore he comes, he hath promised that the heathen shall be
brought to believe on him, and therefore I write this letter to
you. I would come myself, and preach the glad tidings of
salvation among you, as the bearer of this could interpret for
me; but my other business will not permit. I am a minis-
ter of the same Jesus, and once was as ignorant of Him com-
paratively as you may be. I once lived like other people;
but the Lord Jesus hath brought me to believe on Him,
and I now do so no more. I once was full of envy, hatred,
malice, and such like cursed tempers; but now I have love,
and peace, and joy. And because Jesus Christ hath shown
such mercy to me, I desire that all others should be made as
happy, nay happier than I am myself. — Hearken therefore
now to the voice of the Lord. Pray to God that you may
feel yourselves poor, miserable sinners, and come by a living
faith to Jesus Christ. Then he will pardon you of all
your sins, make you holy by his Spirit here, and take you into
everlasting happiness hereafter. Your traders, some of them
at least, will tell you, that you must be miserable, if you will
be Christians. But these know nothing of Jesus Christ;
for they are ungodly men, walking after their own wicked
lusts. Whosoever will follow Jesus Christ, though happy
in himself, must be looked upon as a fool by others. The
spirit of the world, and the spirit of Jesus are quite contrary
one to the other; and therefore if you will live godly in Him,
you must suffer persecution; you must have all manner of evil
spoken against you falsely, and be called madmen and fools;
but let not that daunt you, or make you afraid. There is
a world to come, there is a judgment-day, and then Jesus
Christ shall crown all those with glory, who have suffered
for his name's sake. Once more, therefore, hearken to the
voice of the Lord. For the Lord Jesus died for you, as
well as for the white men among you, and that you might be
taught the gospel; but they have made you worse than you
were before, and therefore shall receive the greater damnation.
He who brings this, no doubt, will be despised amongst them,
because he will, I hope, neither get drunk, nor curse, nor
swear.—But I trust the Lord will strengthen him, and cause
him to show many of you the true way of salvation— I shall
not fail to pray for him, and for you; for though I know you
not, yet if I could thereby save your precious souls, I think
I could die for your sake. May the Lord Jesus bless you,
and bring you out of darkness into his marvellous light, for his
infinite mercy's sake. This is the prayer of, dear brethren,
Your soul's well-wisher and servant in Christ,
G. W.
LETTER CLXXXIV
To the Rev. Mr. I— —, at Philadelphia
My dear Brother, Reedy Island, May 21, 1740.
STILL our Lord is with me both in the ship and on the
shore. Adore him for his free grace. Sailors, I believe,
are coming to Jesus. One or two of our crew are under con-
victions. The Lord does not keep me here for nothing. I
desire to learn of winds and storms to obey Him. I pray daily
for your success. May the Lord make you a happy instru-
ment of bringing many souls to glory. Your weakness need
not discourage you. The Lord is pleased to make use of me.
He strengthens me mightily in the inner man. Oh grace
grace! "Less than the least of all," shall be my motto still.
I need not exhort you to feed the flock of God; he has pur-
chased them with his own blood. Oh admit of a mixed com-
munion. I think the glory of God requires this at your hands.
May the Lord give you a right understanding in all things,
and enable you to remember
Your unworthy brother and fellow-labourer
in our dear Lord Jesus,
G. W.
LETTER CLXXXV
To Mr. M__, at Philadelphia.
Dear Mr. M. Reedy Island, May 21, 1740.
AS the Lord is pleased to detain me here by contrary
winds, why should I not send you a line? You have
stood up for the truths of God, and, I trust, will not be
ashamed of our Lord and his gospel. I expect a great falling
away amongst those that followed me: But I hope dear Mr.
M. will continue stedfast and unmoveable to the last. The
only way is to keep a constant eye to Christ, to go forth in
his strength, and never to rest till you feel his blessed truths
copied and transcribed on your heart. You have often heard
me exclaim against resting on a head-knowledge. You are a
man of strong passions, and sprightly imagination, and there-
fore (I know you will not be affronted) you will make either
a great saint, or an accomplished —. I believe the former,
though, as a friend, I remind you of, and caution you against
the latter. You love to be dealt plainly with. Oh, dear Sir,
I feel that I love you, and have a real concern for you and your
household.—What would I give to see your daughters become
wise virgins, and fallen in love with the blessed Jesus. How
amiable would they then appear! But before this can be done,
all pertness, and lightness of spirit, must be taken away, and
they must not only leave off dancing, but be made new crea-
tures. How is your son? Pray tell him it is time for him to
come home. The fatted calf waits for him. I could say
more; but time will not permit. Dear Sir, pray for me.
Indeed I will endeavour to return the favour; many are wait-
ing for, and would rejoice at my halting; but the Lord is
my helper. He is with me in my little cabin, and gives me a
feeling possession of his blessed spirit. May the Lord enrich
you with a great measure of it, and fill you with all his fulness!
Methinks I see you lifting up your eyes, and saying, Amen.—
And so saith, dear Mr. M.
Your affectionate friend and servant in Christ,
G. W.
LETTER CLXXXVI
To Mr. R__, at Philadelphia.
Dear R. Reedy Island, May 22, 1740.
LET nothing said to you in my absence affect you. God
has lately delivered you out of one snare; take heed how
you fall into another. If you watch unto prayer, who knows
but God may bless your endeavours amongst the poor negro
women and children? I could not wish you more happily situ-
ated.— My love to all the society.—Exhort them not to
rest in good desires. Show them, O show them the necessity
of being deeply wounded, before they can be capable of heal-
ing by Jesus Christ. Bid them to beware of a light be-
haviour, and light company. Both do grieve the blessed spirit
of God. Take heed, take heed of those accursed snares. I
could say more, but time will not permit. My love to the
Negro Peggy, and all her black sisters. Bid them to pray for
me. May the blood of Jesus wash away all the pollutions
of their sin-sick souls! What if they were put into a society
by themselves, and you, or some white woman, met with
them? The good Lord direct! and bless you in all things.—
This is the hearty prayer of
Your sincere friend and servant in Christ,
G. W.
LETTER CLXXXVII
To Mr. E___.
Ready Island, May 22, 1740.
GOD only knows when the wind will favour our removal
hence; I desire patiently to tarry the Lord's leisure,
and to wait the moving of the cloud of his providence. How-
ever, in the meanwhile I send you a line amongst my other
friends. God, I believe, hath struck you to the heart, and
shown you the rottenness of that foundation whereon you was
once building. O keep close to our dear Lord Jesus, and
never fear what men or devils can say of, or do unto you. I
am persuaded you must be buffeted. —You must be persecuted,
if you will live godly in Christ Jesus. Let this be your
comfort, when the world forsakes you, the Lord whom you
serve, shall take you up. I pray for you, and my other dear
Philadelphia friends daily. The Lord be with you all. Adieu.
You would do well to publish, "that all who have not been
baptized already, and shall appear to be prepared for it, I will,
by God's leave, baptize, at my return to Philadelphia." O
that all who followed me were baptized with the Holy Ghost!
But there must be a falling away.—Dear Mr. E, I trust,
will not desert his Lord. Trust in him, and not in your own
strength, and you shall be safe. Once more farewell. All
with me salute you. The people on shore wait for me. Re-
member me in your prayers as
Your affectionate servant in Christ,
LETTER CLXXXVIII
To the Members of a Society at Philadelphia.
My dear Friend, Ready Island, May 22, 1740.
AS the Lord, for wise reasons, detains me here, I cannot
but send you a line as a token of my unfeigned concern
for the welfare of your better part. I must confess, that the
account many of you gave of your experiences, was not so
satisfactory as I could wish; but I hope you will none of you
rest in good desires, or think you are Christians, because you
have followed after me. I thank you, God knows my heart,
I thank you for all expressions of your love: But I beseech you
to remember, that the kingdom of God does not consist in
words, but in power. Keeping company with God's people,
does not give you a title to the privileges of God's children.
It may increase, but not extenuate your condemnation, if you
are not found in heart, and truly converted to our dear Lord
Jesus Christ. I am persuaded you will not be offended at
this plain dealing. God has been pleased to work upon you
by my unworthy ministry. I would therefore watch over you
for good, and warn you against those snares which await all
the true followers of the Lamb of God. At my next return,
I hope I shall see you are that inwardly, which you would be
esteemed outwardly. The searcher of hearts knows I long for
your salvation. My dear friends, adieu. Pray for me. Be
humble, be strong in the Lord and in the power of his might.
A fiery trial awaits you. There is no being a Christian with-
out giving up all for Christ. We must all have the spirit
of martyrdom, though we may not all die martyrs.—That
the Lord may keep you by his power unto salvation, and
make you more than conquerors through his love, is the hearty
prayer of
Your affectionate friend and servant,
G.W.
LETTER CLXXXIX
To Mr. A___ S___, at Philadelphia.
Dear Mr. S. Ready Island, May 22, 1740.
Desire that you and your wife would accept of these few
farewell lines as a token of my love. My heart's desire
and prayer to God is, that you both may be saved. —Your
wife was mourning when I saw her last. May the Lord Jesus
prepare her thereby for true, solid, and lasting comfort! The
more we are humbled, the more will the glorious Emmanuel
exalt us; but we must wait his time. Jesus is love, and
never corrects us but for our own good. I find it is always
thus with me. I am a stubborn, ungrateful, disobedient child,
and often oblige him to strike me severely; but love, I find,
holds the rod, and therefore his rod, as well as his staff com-
forts me. Farewell; the Lord be with you both!—John
S___ and all friends salute you. We live and walk in love.
My tenderest respects await all that truly follow the Lamb. I
beseech you forget not to pray for
Your affectionate friend, brother, and servant,
G.W.
LETTER CXC
To Mr. G__ L__, in London.
Reedy Island, May 22, 1740.
ON Thursday last, in the evening, the Rev. Mr. Whitfield
went on board at Newcastle, in order to sail to Georgia,
after having been on shore thirty-three days, and travelled
some hundreds of miles, and preached fifty-eight times in the
provinces of New-Jersey, New-York, and Pennsylvania,—his
congregations consisted sometimes of four, sometimes of five,
sometimes of eight, twelve, fifteen, and once at Philadelphia,
of twenty thousand people. He had gotten near five hundred
pounds sterling, in money and provisions, for the Orphan-
house at Georgia, Great and visible effects followed his preach-
ing, almost wherever he went, especially in Philadelphia.
There was never such a general awakening, and concern for
the things of God known in America before. He intended
to visit New-England soon after his arrival at Georgia, and to
come by land as far as Philadelphia, at the latter end of the
year." The above Advertisement may suffice for the present, 'till I
have an opportunity of sending you my journal. That will
show you wonderful things. I suppose ere this reaches you,
our dear brothers, S and G, will be arrived: I have
sent a packet of letters to them, by the way of Dublin. I am
now waiting for a fair wind, and can say the Lord is with
me of a truth. Several ships are lying by us, and the captains
and their companies come to our ship to prayers. Sailors
weep: It is unknown how many are under conviction. I
long to hear what is doing in England. The embargoes, I
suppose, prevent your sending; however my heart is with you.
I do not forget you. I hope there is a door opening among
the Allegany Indians. I have read M's journal, and
have wrote both to him and them. We have been near a
week at Reedy Island: I have preached there five times. The
captains and their crews come constantly to public wor-
ship on shore, and to private prayer in our sloop. We have
some with us that love our dear Lord Jesus in sincerity.
My heart is exceedingly drawn towards Savannah; but the
Lord's time is the best. The Lord Jesus bless you all,
and reward you for all kindnesses shown to his unworthy ser-
vant, but
Your affectionate brother in Christ,
G. W.
LETTER CXCI
To W__ S__, Esq; in London.
Lewis-Town, (Pennsylvania) May 24, 1740.
My dear Friend and Brother,
MY will is much to go to Georgia, but my dear Lord
Jesus is pleased to cross me. For ever blessed be his
great and glorious name. Just now the Lord hath brought
me hither. Your letter pleased me, I hope our Lord is
now beginning to answer my prayers, and that my dear Bro-
ther S is about to know himself. You know I have
often told you, that you ought to suspect your experiences.
You have mistaken, in my opinion, preparation, for conversion
itself. Your nine years round of duties, were no effects of
the new birth at all. How could they be? when you did not
know you was to be born again, before you heard Mr. C
If's expound the seventh chapter of the Romans: Then,
but not till then did you begin to be enlightened, and illumi-
nation and conversion are two different things. All my great
trials were consequent on this. Not that God's way of deal-
ing with me, ought to be a rule for others: But I think your
case and mine somewhat parallel.—Those that have been most
humbled, I find, always make the most solid, useful christians.
It stands with reason: The more a man is emptied of himself,
the more room is there made for the spirit of God to dwell in
him.—Your caution to dear Mr. H. was very good. Open-
ness is the best preservative of spiritual friendship. I would
behave so, that no one might be afraid to consult me; but if
people will not open their hearts, let them not blame me; I
cannot speak, where I perceive a shyness, and where I see per-
sons are afraid of me. I am sure they must harbor some un-
generous suspicions or other against me, and how then can
there be a harmony of soul. My dear brother, my friend,
now I have told you my heart: Be not angry, I am just ready
to weep.—Indeed, I am willing to wash your feet, and to
acknowledge all favors under God that I have received from
you. Be stable, be willing to consult others that have trod in
the spiritual road before you; do not mistake working for life,
for working from life. Watch unto prayer, and do not be
carried away by every wind of doctrine. How could you not
see through L of Germantown? But I must not chide,
but love. Much I owe you; have patience with me and I
will endeavor to pay you. I shall long to see you at Savan-
nah. Once more, my dear friend and brother, adieu. My
heart is much melted down. God continually fills me with
himself. O give thanks for, dear Sir,
Your brother and servant in Christ,
G. W.
LETTER CXCII
To the Rev. Mr. F. W.
Honored Sir, Cape-Lopen, May 24, 1740.
I Cannot entertain prejudices against your conduct and
principles any longer, without informing you. The
more I examine the writings of the most experienced men,
and the experiences of the most established christians, the more
I differ from your notion about not committing sin, and your
denying the doctrines of election, and final perseverance
of the saints. I dread coming to England, unless you are re-
solved to oppose these truths with less warmth, than when I
was there last. I dread your coming over to America; because
the work of God is carried on here (and that in a most glori-
ous manner) by doctrines quite opposite to those you hold.
Here are thousands of God's children, who will not be per-
suaded out of the privileges purchased for them by the blood
of Jesus. Here are many worthy experienced ministers, who
would oppose your principles to the utmost. God direct me
what to do! Sometimes I think it best to stay here, where we
all think and speak the same thing: The work goes on with-
out divisions, and with more success, because all employed in
it are of one mind. I write not this, honored Sir, from heat
of spirit, but out of love. At present, I think you are entirely
inconsistent with yourself, and therefore do not blame me, if
I do not approve of all that you say. God himself, I find,
teaches my friends the doctrine of election. Sister H has
lately been convinced of it; and, if I mistake not, dear and
honored Mr. L hereafter will be convinced also. From
my soul I wish you abundant success in the name of the
Lord. I long to hear of your being made a spiritual father
to thousands. Perhaps I may never see you again, 'till we
meet in judgment; then, if not before, you will know, that
sovereign, distinguishing, irresistible grace brought you to hea-
ven. Then will you know, that God loved you with an
everlasting love, and therefore with loving-kindness did he
draw you. Honored Sir, farewell. My prayers constantly
attend both you and your labors. I neglect no opportunity
of writing. My next journal will acquaint you with new
and surprising wonders. The Lord fills me both in body
and soul. I am supported under the prospect of present and
impending trials, with an assurance of God's loving me to the
end; yea, even to all eternity. Ere this reaches you, I sup-
pose you will hear of my intention to marry. I am quite as
free as a child: If it be God's will, I beseech him to prevent
it. I would not be hindered in my dear Lord's business for
the world. I am now waiting for a fair wind. God blesses
the Orphan-house. Do not be angry with, but pray for,
honored Sir,
Your unworthy brother and servant in Christ,
G. W.
LETTER CXCIII
To Mr. S___, in Charles-Town.
Dear Sir, Savannah, June 7, 1740.
BEFORE I knew you by name, my heart was uncommonly affected
towards you. Whenever I saw you at church,
I enquired concerning you, and to my great but pleasing surprise,
when I came to your house, found you was the man I was
inquiring after. Your letter gives me still hopes, that our dear
Lord Jesus is about to awaken you from a carnal security in
which you have long lain. He is now calling you, dear, dear
Sir. I beseech you, by the mercies of God in Christ Jesus
our Saviour, take heed that you do not lie down again. If you
will be a follower of the Lamb of God, you must prepare
your soul for manifold temptations; you must become the
song of the drunkard, and have all manner of evil spoken
against you falsely for Christ's sake: But let none of these
things move you, dear Sir. Dare, I beseech you, to be sin-
gularly good.—Be not ashamed of your glory.—Learn a lesson
of boldness even from the devil's children. How resolute,
how daring are they in their master's cause? Why should not
we be equally courageous in the cause of Jesus Christ? O
Sir, I feel a concern for the welfare of your better part. God
hath vouchsafed you some convictions; do not rest in them.
Catch not too greedily at comfort. Beg of God that you
may be thoroughly wounded, before you desire to be made
whole; otherwise you will go but halfway, and be only an
unstable, double-minded man at last. God forbid that dear
Mr. S should ever settle in such a dangerous state! Ere
long I hope to see you in Charles-Town, and then I shall have
an opportunity of inquiring more particularly into the state of
your soul. I came home but two days ago, and therefore
could not answer your letter before. If I can be serviceable
to you in any respect, be pleased to command, dear Sir,
Your assured friend and servant,
G. W.
LETTER CXCIV
To Mr. F___ H___, in London.
My dear, dear Brother, Savannah, June 7, 1740.
WITH great comfort I received your long wished-for
letter. It warmed my heart, and knit my soul to you
much more than ever. Whenever I see the child-like simpli-
city and love of Jesus, it quite melts me down. Let all for-
mer misunderstandings between me and your friends be entirely
forgotten. I always pitied your parents, and most earnestly
prayed for them and you. Blessed be God that you are come
home. You are now, I believe, as I always did believe, in
your proper station. May God give you a settled habit of
devotion, and so fill you with his spirit, that whilst you are
working for God on earth, you may be like those blessed
angels, who, though ministering to us, yet do always behold
the face of our Father who is in heaven. My dear bro-
ther, let the love of Jesus constrain you to love him with all
your soul. A sense of his divine love now melts down my
heart, and draws tears from my eyes. O what wonderful
things is God doing in America! Savannah also, my dear Sa-
vannah, especially my little orphans, now begin to feel the
love of Jesus Christ. I arrived here but about two days
ago, in an hour quite unexpected by my friends. How
did we weep over one another for joy! Perhaps I may never
feel the like again, till I meet with the sons of God in glory:
But oh what a scene was to be seen last night in the congre-
gation! How did the stately steps of our glorious Emmanuel
appear! His glory shone with exceeding brightness. The
power seemed to be coming on all the day. My soul has been
much carried out in behalf of this place, and now the Lord
is about to answer my prayer. T. D was yesterday
in a glorious agony. I prayed with three of the girls before I
went to church, and their hearts were ready to break: I prayed
also, with strong cryings and tears, with my other dear friends,
and God was much with us then; but when we came to
church, oh what was to be seen, and heard, and felt there!
The power of the Lord came as it were upon all. Most of
the children, both boys and girls, cried bitterly, and most of
the congregation were drowned in tears, and mourned as a
woman mourneth for her first-born. Expense of spirits made
my body weak, but my soul still wrestled earnestly with God.
When I came home, I lay upon my bed; but seeing the chil-
dren and people come home crying, I went to prayer again,
and a greater power than ever still attended it. O how was
my soul carried out, and how did the Holy Ghost fill the room!
At last I thought proper to dismiss them; but it would have
charmed your heart to hear the little ones in different parts of
the house praying, and begging of Jesus to take full posses-
sion of their hearts. The same power continues to-day: For
near two hours, four or five of the girls have been before the
Lord weeping most bitterly, and under such agonies, as gives
me hope our Lord will soon send them deliverance. I have
not yet talked with the boys, who also have been under great
concern, and one especially in great agonies. I believe two
or three will be truly gracious. I have brought with me a
Latin master, and on Monday laid a foundation in the name of
our dear Jesus for an university in Georgia. God blesses me
(O free and sovereign grace) in every thing I undertake.
Our Orphan-house comes under better regulations every day,
and I am persuaded, in the end, will produce some true fol-
lowers of Jesus Christ. I am now looking for fresh attacks
from the enemy, after such inroads. He has been busy since
my departure, but the Lord hath vouchsafed to rebuke and
disappoint him. My dear brother, may the Lord be with
you! For Christ's sake desire dear Brother W to avoid
disputing with me, I think I had rather die, than to see a
division between us; and yet, how can we walk together, if
we oppose each other? Adieu. Dear James, with much
tenderness I subscribe myself
Ever yours,
G. W.
LETTER CXCV
To T__ T__, Esq; in London.
My dear Friend and Brother, Savannah, June 7, 1740.
I Wrote to you very lately; but your kind letter is now
before me, and I cannot forbear answering it: Blessed be
God, that you still look upon me as your friend. May the
friend of all, unite us in the best bonds, and bring us to him-
self at last! I long to see the son of man coming in the clouds
of heaven. I have now such large incomes from above, and
such precious communications from our dear Lord Jesus,
that my body sometimes can scarcely sustain them. Our dear
Brother H's letter (which I desire you may see) will
show you what a work is begun at Savannah. I am in great
hopes, that six or seven boys and girls are really coming to
Jesus Christ. Dear Brother H sojourns with us. I
love him, and all the brethren, in the bowels of Jesus
Christ. I am now looking for some strong attacks from
satan. The Lord comforts me on every side, and lets me
see my desire in the salvation of many souls. O, dear Mr.
——, forget not
Your weak unworthy friend and brother in Christ,
G. W.
LETTER CXCVI
To Mr. M___.
Dear Mr. M__, Savannah, June 11, 1740.
I Am not uneasy, but rather joyful, to find God lets you
see more and more into the misery of your depraved nature.
I pray God, these convictions may still increase, and that you
may not fall short of a saving union with Jesus Christ.
I am concerned to find you have lost a sense of your first love.
—Take heed, my dear friend, and wrestle with your dear
Lord, till he lets you see the root of bitterness that must cer-
tainly be in some corner of your heart. Perhaps you have not
renounced the world and your own righteousness, and then no
wonder our Lord doth not manifest himself to your soul.
Sometimes, indeed, God withdraws on purpose to wean us
from sensible devotion, and to take us off from seeking any self-
complacence in our duties. If this be the case of you and
your friends, you are patiently to tarry the Lord's leisure, and
to continue striving with all your might till he is pleased to lift
up the light of his blessed countenance upon you. You must
seek Jesus though it be sorrowing, and then, after three days,
you will find him; for the Lord will not always be chiding,
neither keepeth he his anger for ever. That God may daily
renew you in the spirit of your mind, is the hearty prayer of,
dear Sir,
Your assured friend and servant in Christ,
G. W.
LETTER CXCVII
To Mr. W__ W__, in London.
Dear W___ Savannah, June 11, 1740.
I Am sorry to hear, that you and your makers cannot agree;
but this I know, supposing the case to be as you represent
it, you must notwithstanding "be obedient, not only to the good
and gentle, but also to the froward."—Rough usage will do
you good, if you are sincere; God sees the pride and stub-
bornness of your heart, and therefore sends you these trials to
beat it down: I find the benefit of crosses. What should I
do without them? Dear brother S would write to
you, I believe, but is much engaged. —We love one another
in the bowels of Jesus Christ. O, dear W., keep
close to God, and see you are that inwardly, which you would
be esteemed outwardly. —Rest in nothing short of a sound
and thorough conversion. That God may bless you, and all
the brethren, with all spiritual blessings, is the hearty prayer
of
Your assured friend and servant,
G. W.
LETTER CXCVIII
To the Rev. Mr. J___ B___, at New-York.
Reverend and dear Brother, Savannah, June 13, 1740.
I Have just been reading the three letters you sent some time
ago to our dear brother N, and find my heart much
inclined to write you a line. Whatever others may do, yet I
am far from judging you on account of God's dealings with
your soul. I rather rejoice in them, having myself been blest
with many experiences of the like nature. But, my dear
brother, if God works upon us in an extraordinary manner,
we must prepare for temptation, even from our Christian
brethren.
Most judge of others from what has passed within them-
selves; and many of the dear children of God are too apt to
confine God to this or that particular way of acting;
whereas he is a sovereign agent: his sacred spirit bloweth
when, and where, and how it listeth; and when an uncommon
work is to be done, no doubt he will work upon his
chosen instruments in an uncommon manner. What the
event of the present general awakening will be, I know not.
I desire to follow my dear Lord blindfold, whithersoever he
is pleased to lead me; and to do just so much, and no more,
as his providence points out to me. Wonderful things have
been done ever since my arrival at Savannah: such an awaken-
ing among little children, I never saw before. Our dear bro-
ther N's letter will acquaint you with particulars. O
my dear brother, how ought such manifestations of God's
glory, to quicken our souls, and excite us to lay out ourselves
more and more in the service of the best of Masters, Jesus
Christ! Every day he fills me with himself, and sometimes
brings me even upon the confines of eternity. Methinks I
often stand upon Mount Pisgah, and take a view of the heavenly
Canaan, and then long to be gathered to my people: but, my
dear brother, both you and I must suffer, and that great things,
before we enter into glory. My work is scarce begun;
my trials are yet to come. What is a little scourge of the
tongue? What is a thrusting out of the synagogues? The
state of temptation will be, when we are thrust into an in-
ner prison, and feel the iron entering even into our souls.'
Then, perhaps, even God's people may be permitted to for-
sake us for a while, and none but the Lord Jesus to stand by
us. "But if thou, O dearest Redeemer! wilt strengthen me
in the inner man, let enemies plunge me into a fiery furnace,
or throw me into a den of lions." My dear brother, my
heart is enlarged towards you: though I never saw, yet I
love you most tenderly. How does dear brother D. P.?
Does he yet walk in the light of God's countenance? Pray fa-
vorably him lovingly in my name. In the fall, I hope to see you
in Long Island, and to be somewhat filled with your company.
In the meanwhile, let us all keep a close walk with Jesus;
and be pleased, in an especial manner, to remember
Your unworthy, though affectionate brother,
fellow-laborer, and servant In our common Lord,
G. W.
LETTER CXCIX
To the Rev. Mr. F. W.
Savannah, June 25, 1740.
My honored Friend and Brother,
Thank you for, and heartily say amen to all the petitions
you have put up in my behalf. I want to be as my Mas-
ter would have me; I mean, meek and lowly in heart. Dear
Sir, bear with me a little longer;
pray for me with great ear-
nestness; and who knows but my God may give me to abhor
myself in dust and ashes! He that hath given us his Son, will
he not with him freely give us all things? For Christ's sake,
if possible, dear Sir, never speak against election in your ser-
mons: no one can say that I ever mentioned it in public dis-
courses, whatever my private sentiments may be. For
Christ's sake, let us not be divided amongst ourselves: no-
thing will so much prevent a division as your being silent on
this head. I should have rejoiced at the sight of your Journal.
I long to sing a hymn of praise for what God has done for
your soul. I am glad to hear that you speak up for an attend-
ance on the means of grace, and do not encourage persons who
run (I am persuaded) before they are called. The work of
God will suffer much by such imprudence. I trust you will
still persist in field-preaching. Others are strangers to our
call. I know infinite good hath been done by it already, and
greater good will yet be done thereby every day: but we must
be judged of our brethren. May God bless you more and
more every day, and cause you to triumph in every place.
Next Monday, God willing, I go to Charles-Town. My fa-
mily is well regulated; but I want some more gracious assist-
ants. I have near an hundred and thirty to maintain daily,
without any fund. The Lord gives me a full undisturbed
confidence in his power and goodness. Dear Sir, adieu. I
can write no more; my heart is full. I want to be a little
child. O continue to pray for
Your most unworthy, but affectionate brother and servant
in our dear Lord Jesus Christ,
G. W.
LETTER CC
To Mr. F___ H___.
Dear F___ Savannah, June 25, 1740.
EVERY letter you write, knits my heart more and more
to you in the bowels of Jesus Christ. Your last I
received on Saturday. God had been preparing me for it, by
a week's intimation upon my heart, and by an inexpressible
agony in my soul just before it came to hand. Blessed be God
that our friends preach up poverty of spirit, for that is the only
foundation whereon to build solid abiding comfort. The stony
ground received the word with joy; but how did those hearers
stand in a day of temptation? They fell away; for it is very
possible that the heart may have much joy floating on the top
of it, and yet be as hard as the nether millstone. Hence it is
that so many, who boast of rest in their flashes of joy, are self-
willed, impatient of reproof, despisers of others in a mourning
state, and wise in their own conceits: whereas the believer,
that hath been with his Lord in the wilderness, and has a
truly broken and contrite heart, though his joy may not be so
extravagant, yet it is substantial. Such a soul hangs upon
God; thinks before he speaks; and is continually hearkening
for what the Lord will say to him, by the small still voice of
his spirit. This is the state I want all our friends to arrive at.
I cannot see how they can, with assurance, talk of their enjoy-
ing solid fellowship with the Father, and his dear Son Christ
Jesus. I shall not be surprised if many, who seemingly be-
gan in the spirit, do end in the flesh, and turn persecutors of
the doctrines and disciples of Jesus Christ. How can they
possibly stand, who never felt themselves condemned crimi-
nals? who were never truly burdened with a sense not only
of their actual, but original sin, especially that damning sin
of unbelief? who were never brought to see and heartily confess,
that after they had done all, God might, notwithstanding, deny
them mercy; and that it is owing merely to his sovereign love
in Christ Jesus our Lord, that they can have any hopes of
being delivered from the wrath to come? It is for preaching
in this manner that I like Messrs. Ts. They wound deep
before they heal; they know that there is no promise made
but to him that believeth; and therefore they are careful not
to comfort over much those that are convicted. I fear I have
been too incautious in this respect, and have often given com-
fort too soon. The Lord pardon me for what is past, and
teach me more rightly to divide the word of truth for the fu-
ture. Dearest J, pardon this freedom; I am constrained
to write in this manner. I thank you most heartily for your
historical letter. Fail not writing to me often. Dearest J,
help me by your prayers: for Christ's sake help me. Our
Lord is yet with us. I hear different accounts of things;
but I pray for all, and suspend my judgment till you see
Your affectionate brother and servant,
G. W.
LETTER CCI
To Mrs. E___ C___.
My dear Sister, Savannah, June 25, 1740.
YOUR letter afforded me much inward pleasure. Surely
it bespeaks the Writer not to be far from the kingdom
of God. You was then waiting for our Lord's salvation:
ere now, I trust, Christ hath manifested his glory, filled you
with his blessed spirit, and thereby sealed you to the day of re-
demption. 'Tis good to be long in an humbled state: it is
the best preparation for solid, lasting comfort. Blessed are
they that mourn most, for they shall be the most comforted:
not that we are violently to keep ourselves in such a state; but
when God's hand lies heavy upon us, we are patiently to tarry
the Lord's leisure, till he reveals himself to our souls. I was
a mourner a long while; but, glory be to God! I have for
some years been almost continually comforted; at least kept
from doubting of my interest in Jesus Christ. I can with
an humble boldness cry out, "My Lord and my God!"
He daily manifests himself to my soul, and causes me to feel
my dependence on his free grace and sovereign love. This is
the kingdom of God within us. O, my dear sister, what
would I give, were all the world partakers of this unspeakable
gift! I long, I burn with an ardent zeal after the salvation of
my dear brethren, who are dead in trespasses and sins. Poor
souls! Why am I taken, and they left? O the sovereign,
free, unmerited, distinguishing love of my and your Jesus!
My dear sister, let us love him, let us obey him; let us
suffer for him with a cheerful heart! His love will sweeten
every cup, though never so bitter. Let us pledge him wil-
lingly, and continue faithful even unto death. A scene of suf-
ferings lies before us. Who knows but we may wade to our
Saviour through a sea of blood? I expect (O pray that I may
be strengthened if called to it) to die for his great name's sake,
'Twill be sweet to wear a martyr's crown. Dear Madam,
adieu. I remember God's goodness to us at Broad-Oaks. I
pray for you and yours. I trust your daughters keep close to
Jesus. Salute them kindly in my name. Read my Journal,
and give hearty thanks for
Your unworthy brother and servant in Christ Jesus,
G. W.
LETTER CCII
To the Rev. Mr. S___, in London.
Rev. and dear Sir, Savannah, June 26, 1740.
AND is one of the priests also obedient to the word?
Blessed be God, the Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ, who hath translated you from darkness to light;
from the power of Satan to the service of the ever-living God.
Now know I, that our glorious Emmanuel has not commanded
us to pray in vain. Surely we shall never taste of death, till
we see our dear Lord's kingdom coming with greater power.
He seems to be thrusting out more laborers into his harvest.
Glory be to his free grace that you are one of the happy num-
ber. O dear Sir, rejoice and be exceeding glad; and let the
love of Jesus constrain you to go out into the highways and
hedges to compel poor sinners to come in. Some (even that
are true lovers of the Lamb) may say "this is not proceeding
with a zeal according to knowledge": but I am persuaded,
when the power of religion revives, the gospel must be pro-
pagated in the same manner as it was first established,
"itinerant preaching." Go on, dear Sir, go on, and follow your
glorious Master without the camp, bearing his sacred reproach.
Never fear the scourge of the tongue, or the threatenings that
are daily breathed out against the Lord, and against his
Christ. Suffer we must, I believe, and that great things.
Our Lord, by his providence, begins to show it. Ere long,
perhaps, we may sing in a prison, and have our feet set fast in
the stocks. But faith in Jesus turns a prison into a palace,
and makes a bed of flames become a bed of down. Let us be
faithful today, and our Lord will support us tomorrow.
O dear Sir, though I know you not, yet my heart is en-
larged towards you, and I make mention of your name in my
prayers. I pray God to give you strength to bear the heat
and burden of every day, and to enable you to preach with
such wisdom, that all your adversaries may not be able to
gain say or resist. Blessed be his holy name, I drink deep of
his love every moment. A greater power than ever attends my
poor labors; and several of my own household, both boys and
girls, I really believe, are coming savingly to Jesus Christ.
I am now about to go to Charles-Town; a work of God is
begun there. Who knows but I may see my dear brother
S in America? But future things belong to God; to
his grace and love I commend you. Keep close to your dear
Jesus, and pray that a child-like, humble spirit, may be given
to
Your unworthy brother and fellow-labourer
G. W.
LETTER CCIII
To Wm. S__, Esq; in London.
My dear Brother S___, Savannah, June 26, 1740.
I Sent you a packet of letters from Charles-Town, the middle
of this month. Since that time, I have received many
agreeable letters from England; but find from Blendon letters
that Miss E D is in a seeking state only. Surely
that will not do; I would have one that is full of faith and
the Holy Ghost. Just now I have been weeping, and much
carried out in prayer before the Lord. My poor family gives
me more concern than everything else put together. I want
a gracious woman that is dead to everything but Jesus, and is
qualified to govern children, and direct persons of her own
sex. Such a one would help, and not retard me in my dear
Lord's work. I wait upon the Lord every moment; I hang
upon my Jesus: and he is so infinitely condescending, that
he daily grants me fresh tokens of his love, and assures me
that he will not permit me to fall by the hands of a woman.
I am almost tempted to wish I had never undertaken the or-
phan-house. At other times, I am willing to contrive mat-
ters so that I may not marry: but I am always checked; and
looking back upon the workings of my heart in this affair, I
am more and more convinced that it is of God; and there-
fore know he will order affairs for me, as will best promote
his own glory. So that my dear Lord's honor does not suf-
fer, I care not what trouble in the flesh I undergo. His glory,
to the best of my knowledge, is my only aim, in my thoughts,
words, and actions. My dearest brother, adieu. By this
time, I trust, you are near England. Dear brother S
goes with me to Charles-Town. Brother B keeps house in
my absence. Take heed that the people you bring believe on
Jesus. Expect to hear shortly again from
Your affectionate brother and servant In Christ,
G. W.
LETTER CCIV
To Mr. W__ D__.
My dear Brother, Savannah, June 28, 1740.
I Thank you for your kind letters and friendly cautions;
and trust shall always reckon those my choicest friends,
who, in simplicity and meekness, tell me the corruptions of
my heart. It is that faithfulness which hath endeared J
S to me. I think I never was obliged to any one so much
before: for that reason also I find my heart knit to you. O
my dear brother, still continue faithful to my soul: do not
hate me in your heart; in any wise reprove me. Exhort all
my dear brethren to forgive my past (I fear) too imperious
carriage; and let them pray that I may know myself to be
what I really am, less than the least of them all. I have abun-
dant reason to bless God for sending me abroad. I cannot
say I have improved my retirement as I ought; but I can say
it hath been highly beneficial to my soul. I have a garden
near at hand, where I go particularly to meet and talk with
my God, at the cool of every day. I often sit in silence, of-
fering my soul as so much clay, to be stamped just as my hea-
venly potter pleases: and whilst I am musing, I am often filled
as it were with the fullness of God. I am frequently at Cal-
vary, and frequently on Mount Tabor; but always assured of
my Lord's everlasting love. O continue to pray for me,
that I may know myself even as I am known. I want to have
a proper mixture of the lion and the lamb, of the serpent and
the dove. I do not despair of attaining it. Jesus is love;
Jesus willeth my perfection; Jesus hath died for me; Jesus
can deny me nothing. He hath given me himself; will he
not then freely give me all things besides? I Wait for thy com-
plete salvation, O LORD! My dear brother, my heart is
now enlarged. Your prayer is answered. The whole God-
head now fills my soul. O grace, grace! O Jesus, Jesus!
was ever love like thine! Lord, I abhor myself in dust and
ashes. O that I could praise thee! that I could love thee
as I ought! My dear brother, I hear you have been zealous for
the Lord your God since my departure. You have done
well: you never can be zealous for a better master: but why
silent? why withdrawn? Did you go before you was called
or qualified? If so, you have done right: but I suspend my
judgment; for I find there is no judging at a distance. I only
pray God that you may always feel yourself a very poor sinner,
and find refuge in the wounds and blood of the Lamb. I re-
joice to hear the work of God goes on, and heartily wish you
may not be divided among yourselves. Our dear Lord is
with us here: I only want a few more gracious, solid assist-
ants. The Lord will send them in his due time to
Your affectionate brother and servant in Christ,
G. W.
LETTER CCV
To F__ B__.
Good Hope, (South-Carolina) July 2, 1740.
My dear Brother B__,
IS it true, that one night whilst you was expounding, you
told your hearers, from your own experience, that " they
could not go on without throwing aside the means of grace?"
or words to that purpose? If so, I pity you; for you are not
only misled yourself, but are also misguiding others. But this
is no more than I expected. I think you began to teach too
soon, and before you had a commission given you from above.
Brother F__ was of the same opinion, before I left England.
For that reason, I would not take you to Georgia. Blessed be
God, I have no such over-forward spirits there. My dear
B -y I write in love. For Christ's sake try your spirit:
I fear you were never yet truly humbled. I know you have
had joy; but I always thought it was joy floating on the sur-
face of an unmortified heart. From such a joy, good Lord
deliver us! O that you had been in the wilderness a little
longer! then you might have been an experienced teacher;
but I fear you are now only a novice. May the Lord keep
you from falling into the condemnation of the devil. I write
not this to damp, but to regulate your spirit; if you are
humble, you will take it kind. God knows, I wish all the
Lord's servants were prophets; but I would not have my
Master's work suffer by a too heady way of proceeding. Why
should you dishonour him by acting above your sphere, whereas
you might honour him by acting in it. Every one
is not fit to be a public expounder. To build up awakened
sinners in private, is what is more wanted at present than
young inexperienced preachers. But I have done; I fear I
have offended my brother: forgive me this wrong. As God
was pleased first to work upon you by my ministry, you must
always expect to be watched over by
Your affectionate friend, brother and servant,
G. W.
LETTER CCVI
Dear Mr. R__, Charles-Town, July 11, 1740.
YOUR letter much rejoiced me. O that you may still
follow on, till you truly know the Lord! I shall be
glad to have you for a scribe, if you are well instructed in the
things which belong to the kingdom of heaven. Keep close,
my dear friend, keep close to the dear Mr. Ts: under
God, they will build you up in your most holy faith. It
gladdens my heart to hear of their success in the Lord. The
Lord increase them more and more, and multiply the num-
ber of their spiritual children! I suppose brother G*s
letter informed you what a speedy passage the Lord gave us,
and how we were received at Georgia. Surely I shall never
see the like again, till I meet the sons of God in glory.
Praise the Lord, O my soul! my dear friend, help me to
praise the Lord. I have been here above a week. The Lord
hath been pleased to work on many hearts. On Sunday the
commissary denied me the sacrament; but my dear Master fed
me, notwithstanding, with the bread which cometh down
from heaven. Persecution seems to be coming on more and
more. My dear friend, see that you are rooted and ground-
ed in love and faith; or how will you stand fast in a dying
hour? With difficulty I write this before morning service. I
preach generally, in town or country, twice a day. The heat
is great; but the Lord enables me to bear the burden of it.
Next month, God willing, I go to New-England, and hope
to see Philadelphia in November. On Tuesday next I am cited
to appear before the commissary and his court in a judicial
way: the event I leave to my dear Lord Jesus. O dear
Mr. R——, let not the cross keep you from Jesus. If we
suffer, we shall reign with him. Salute your honoured mo-
ther in my name, and all that love our dear Lord in sincerity,
from, dear Mr. R__,
Your affectionate friend and servant in Christ,
G. W.
LETTER CCVII
To Mr. F__ R__.
Dear F, Charles-Town, July 15, 1740.
MAY you answer your name, be freely gracious, and
filled with as much love as he was, who leaned on the
sacred bosom of our dear Redeemer. I believe God has be-
gun; if so, God will carry on the good work in your heart.
It is the Lord's doing. Not unto me, not unto me; but to
free, rich, distinguishing, sovereign grace, be all the glory!
The wearing off, or forgetting your convictions formerly,
ought to make you more jealous of yourself now. The more
you see the enmity of the heart, the better: you cannot then
avoid abhorring yourself in dust and ashes. I rejoice you
have been at Neshaminy. I can say of Mr. T and their
brethren, as David did of Goliath's sword, "None like them."
I am glad you and my friend R are acquainted. O see
that you keep one another warm, and be zealous for the Lord
your God. I wonder not at your master's insinuations. In-
deed, dear F, you must be tried thoroughly, if you would
approve yourself to the glorious Emmanuel. Exhort all to die
for him, rather than deny him in any wise. I find my suf-
fering time at hand: but my dear Lord comforts me with
his gracious and refreshing presence. A good work is carry-
ing on here: let my dear friends help it forwards by their
prayers. My love to all at the society; and accept of the
same from
Your affectionate friend and servant in Christ,
G. W.
LETTER CCVIII
To Mr. B__, in Pennsylvania.
My dear Brother, Charles-Town, July 18, 1740.
PRAISE the Lord, O my soul! Our glorious Emmanuel
seems to have girt his sword upon his thigh, and to be
riding on from conquering to conquer. He gets himself the
victory in Philadelphia. He is getting himself the victory in
Charles-Town also. Indeed, a glorious work is begun, and car-
rying on here. Many souls are awakened to a sense of the
divine life. The alteration in the people since I came here
at first, is surprising. I preach twice a day, generally, either
in town or in the villages around. The commissary shoots
out his arrows, even bitter words. He hath denied me the
sacrament, and cited me to appear before him and his court;
I was obliged to appeal home. O my dear brother, pray
that I may be humble and of a child-like spirit. Every day
God shows me fresh instances of his love. Here are some
faithful ministers amongst the Baptists. One of them, Mr.
C , has written to you;
pray answer him. Some time next
month I hope to be at New England, and to return to
you according to promise. Be pleased to salute the brethren
in my name. Indeed I honour and love you in the bowels of
Jesus Christ. O that I was worthy of your acquaintance!
But I am not. All that I can say is, that I will endeavour to
approve myself
Your affectionate friend, brother,
and servant in Christ,
G. W.
LETTER CCIX
To Mr. I. R__.
My Dear Friend, Charles-Town, July 18, 1740.
I Thank you for going with friend E and B to
Nazareth. May God bless you, and cause great good to
come to that place! God seems to be carrying on as great a
work in Charles-Town, comparatively speaking, as in Philadel-
phia. Surely our Lord intends to set the world in a flame,
O that the holy fire of his divine love was kindled in every
heart! Be pleased to read what I have sent to Mr. IV--.
If you please, you may print that extract, which I sent from
my journal: God willing, I hope to be at New England by
the beginning of September, and to be refreshed with your and
my dear friend's letters. Indeed, I love you all in the bowels
of my dear Lord Jesus. Do not let us forsake him.
Let us not be ashamed of him, though we live in a crooked and
perverse generation. I thank my dear friends for their zeal in
building a house; but desire it may not have any particular
name, or be put to any particular use, till my return to Phi-
ladelphia. I wish them good luck in the name of the Lord.
Last night I appeared a third time in a public court; but they
not accepting my Recusatio judicis, I appealed home; so that
now I have free liberty to embark when providence pleaseth.
My dear friend, think of a bleeding, dying Lord.
Keep close to him, and exhort all friends to pray and give
thanks for
Your assured friend and servant,
G. W.
LETTER CCX
To Mr. G__ L__.
Dear Brother L__, Charles-Town, July 18, 1740.
GOD will work, and who shall hinder? The sacrament
hath been refused to me, and I have appeared thrice in
open court, before the commissary and some of his clergy; but
our Lord rides on, from conquering to conquer. Many, I be-
lieve, are really pricked to the heart. The commissary's detain-
ing me here, has much tended to the furtherance of the gospel.
I put in my exceptions against his sitting as my judge, and
they were repelled; so that I have appealed home, and all
other proceedings here are stopped. By this means I shall
have liberty to preach the gospel without further interruption,
and my call to England will be more clear. The enclosed
paper will show you what is doing in Philadelphia. Private
letters received from thence last night and this morning, have
much refreshed my heart. Many souls are flocking to the
Lord Jesus. I need not exhort you to praise the Lord.
You may advertise what paragraphs you think proper, only
add that Philadelphia people are building a house for me to
preach in, 106 feet long and 74 feet wide. The Lord is
bringing mighty things to pass. I am surprisingly strength-
ened to bear the heat and burden of every day. My dear
Lord never leaves nor forsakes me, but works by my unwor-
thy ministry more and more. O that I was humble! O that
I was a little, little child! I know not how soon I may be
called to England. The inhabitants here are wondrous kind.
They attend morning and evening most cheerfully on my
preaching. We often see the stately steps of our dear Lord
in his sanctuary. I am more than happy. I am amazed at
the divine goodness. Lord, I abhor myself in dust and ashes!
See the wonders of the Lord; help us to praise him.
Excuse me to all my dear friends. For this fortnight past
I have not wrote a word of my journal. My sermons, &c.,
are bought off exceedingly, northward. O pray that an hum-
ble child-like spirit may be given to
Ever yours in Christ,
G. W.
LETTER CCXI
To the Reverend Mr. D__.
My dear Brother D___, Savannah, August 15, 1740.
OUR dear Lord (after being pleased to bring me low by
bodily sickness) now gives me liberty to write to you.
Whilst I am writing, I find my heart united with yours. I
hope we have both drank into the same spirit, and are both
instances of the same sovereign, distinguishing, everlasting
love. O let us extol it! O let us improve daily! And
since God sees fit that we shall not die, but live, let us
lay ourselves out to declare the works of the Lord. I am
ashamed of my past unfruitfulness. Had others received the
stock, that hath been intrusted to me, how would they have
improved it? Indeed I am an unprofitable servant. In the
righteousness of Jesus my Lord, is my only refuge. Well
may God afflict me; I richly deserve it; and when he brings
me low, nothing grieves me so much, as to think that I
should be so froward as to oblige the God of love to strike me
with his rod. But oh the goodness of the Lord! His rod,
as well as staff, do comfort and build up my soul. I would
not but be tried for ten thousand worlds. Blessed be God,
I am enabled to clasp the cross, and desire to glory in nothing
more. Dear brother, help me with your prayers. Our vic-
torious Jesus makes his power to be known; many have I
seen struck quite down by the power of the word. The holy
Ghost hath often come like a mighty rushing wind. Satan
has desired to sift us as wheat. But our Lord still shows
me, that the orphan-house will go on and flourish. It is of-
ten a great weight upon my soul; but through your and my
dear friends' prayers, the Lord I am persuaded will still sup-
port it.
Yours eternally in Christ Jesus,
G. W.
LETTER CCXII
To Mr, N__, in New York.
My dear Brother, Savannah, Aug. 15, 1740.
YOUR letter rejoiced my heart. May our dear Lord's
kingdom be advanced more and more every day! O
that I may meet you at New-England! Blessed be God that
Mr. M is yet alive. Salute him from me; I hope to
see him before I die, and so be taught the way of God more
perfectly. I thank you for your kind hints; I have always
paid great deference to dear Mr. N 's judgment: indeed I
love him in the bowels of Jesus. God has been pleased to
bring me low, for some time, by inward weakness, and faint-
ness of spirits. The first strength that is given me to write,
I make use of in writing to you. The Lord is purging me,
that I may bring forth more fruit. I long to die, not that I
may be rid of crosses, but that I may be with Christ. He
draws me more and more to him every day. I have had many
close domestic trials of late. But these words, "David
strengthened himself in the Lord his God," came with sweet
power to my soul. I find, the nearer I come to Christ, the
closer my trials are. I have been sometimes through weak-
ness kept from preaching; but when I have spoken, the word
has come with power. I have reason to think, that three per-
sons who came to see the orphan-house, have been effectu-
ally called by our Lord Jesus. I have now some Carolina
visitors in my house; two of them, I believe, are coming tru-
ly to Jesus.—The word runs like lightning in Charles-Town.
A serious lively Baptist minister, named Tilly, is here also; he
has preached often for me, and last Sunday received the sacra-
ment in our way.—O bigotry, thou art tumbling down
apace! Blessed be God.—Next week, God willing, I em-
bark for Charles-Town, shall stay there a few days, and from
thence purpose going to New-England. God wonderfully
provides for my orphans.—I am kept from every degree of
doubting; nay, the Lord fills me daily with a full assurance
of faith. He chastens and corrects me, but it is all in love.
help me to praise him, and thereby add to the obligati-
ons already laid on, dear Mr. N,
Ever yours,
G. W.
LETTER CCXIII
To Mrs. L__.
Honoured Mother, Charles-Town, Aug. 22, 1740.
ALTHOUGH I had not the pleasure of receiving one
line, either from your dear self, or from any other of
my beloved friends;
yet my heart was rejoiced just now by a
sailor, who told me, that he saw and conversed with you the
twenty-ninth of May last. I thank you for the salutation sent
to me by him. Indeed I thank you from my very heart: for
I feel myself unworthy of your notice. Every day I love and
honour you more and more; and when you come to judg-
ment, God will show you how many tears I have shed in se-
cret for you and my dear sister. O let them not be in vain!
Honoured Mother, fly to Jesus.—Behold, with open arms,
yonder he stands, ready to embrace you, if you feel your
misery, and are willing to come to him to find rest. May the
great God, who only can govern the wills and affections of
sinful men, make you willing in the day of his power! Ye-
sterday God brought me hither again. In a few days, I hope
to embark for New-England; then, God willing, you may
expect another letter. For near six weeks past I have been
under great weakness of body; but notwithstanding have been
enabled sometimes to preach with great power. I am now
somewhat better, but, without a miracle, cannot think of be-
ing long below. Indeed, honoured Mother, I every day long
to be dissolved and to be with Christ. Pray tell Mr. N__,
that Mr. H__, and L B__, with one or two more
of their relations, I believe, are effectually called of God. We
had much power at Savannah. God hath sent me some family
trials; but all things are working for good. I am, honoured
Mother,
Your ever dutiful son.
G. W.
LETTER CCXIV
To the Reverend Mr. F__ W__.
Dear and Honoured Sir, Charles-Town, Aug. 25, 1740.
LAST night I had the pleasure of receiving an extract of
your journal.'—This morning I took a walk and read it.
I pray God to give it his blessing. Many things I trust will
prove beneficial, especially the account of yourself. Only,
give me leave with all humility to exhort you not to be stren-
uous in opposing the doctrines of election and final perseverance,
when, by your own confession, "you have not the witness of
the Spirit within yourself," and consequently are not a pro-
per judge. I remember dear brother E told me one day,
that "he was convinced of the perseverance of the saints."
I told him, you was not. He replied, but he will be con-
vinced when he hath got the Spirit himself. I am assured,
God has now for some years given me this living witness in my
soul. I cannot say, I have since indulged any doubts (at least
for no considerable time) about the forgiveness of my sins;
nay, I can scarce say, that I ever doubted at all. When I
have been nearest death, my evidences have been the clearest.
I can say, I have been on the borders of Canaan, and do every
day, nay, almost every moment, long for the appearing of our
Lord Jesus Christ; not to evade sufferings, but with a
single desire to see his blessed face. I feel his blessed spi-
rit daily filling my soul and body, as plain as I feel the air
which I breathe, or the food I eat.—Perhaps the doctrines of
election and of final perseverance hath been abused, (and what
doctrine has not,) but notwithstanding, it is children's bread,
and ought not in my opinion to be withheld from them, sup-
posing it is always mentioned with proper cautions against the
abuse. Dear and Honoured Sir, I write not this to enter into
disputation. I hope, at this time, I feel something of the
meekness and gentleness of Christ. I cannot bear the
thoughts of opposing you: but how can I avoid it, if you
go about (as your brother C once said) to drive John Cal-
vin out of Bristol. Alas, I never read anything that Cal-
vin wrote; my doctrines I had from Christ and his apostles;
I was taught them of God; and as God was pleased to send
me out first, and to enlighten me first, so I think he still conti-
nues to do it. My business seems to be chiefly in planting; if
God send you to water, I praise his name.—I wish you a thou-
sandfold increase. I find, by young JV 's letter, there is dis-
puting among you about election, and perfection.—I pray God
to put a stop to it, for what good end will it answer?—I wish I
knew your principles fully; did you write oftener, and more
frankly, it might have a better effect than silence and reserve. I
have lately had many domestic trials, and that about points of
doctrine, not by myself, but from others in my absence. I daily
wait upon God, depending on his promise, that all things,
even this, shall work together for my good. Many in Charles-
Town, I believe, are called of God. You may now find a
Christian, without searching the town as with a candle. Mr.
G is less furious, at least in public. He hath expended
all his strength, and finds he cannot prevail. Adieu, Ho-
noured Sir, Adieu! My health is better, since I last left
Charles Town, and am now freed from domestic cares. With
almost tears of love to you, and the brethren, do I subscribe
myself, honoured Sir,
Your most affectionate brother and servant in Christ,
G. W.
LETTER CCXV
To Mrs, F__ , L__, in Bristol.
Dear F__, Charles-Town, Aug. 26, 1740.
I Hope you and your little society go on and prosper,
I hear there are divisions among you. Avoid them
if possible. The doctrines of election, and of final persever-
ance, I hold as well as you.—But then, they are not to be
contended for with heat and passion. Such a proceeding
will only prejudice the cause you would defend. Pray
show this to your other friends.—Exhort them to avoid all
clamour, and evil speaking, and with meekness receive the
ingrafted word which is able to save your soul. God has
begun a great work here, and in other parts of America; but
yet, I believe, I shall shortly have a call to England, O pray
it may be the divine will, that I may have a prosperous jour-
ney; and that you may see me grown in grace, and in the
knowledge of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ.—With
tenderest love to all, I am
Your affectionate brother and servant,
G. W.
LETTER CCXVI
To the Right Reverend Father in God, Edmund Lord Bishop of
London.
On board the Savannah, bound from Charles-Town to Boston,
September —, 1740.
My Lord,
ALTHOUGH your Lordship has been pleased to cau-
tion the people against running into those extremes,
to which your Lordship apprehended my doctrine would lead
men; yet I am persuaded that will not in any way influence
your Lordship, as to the contents of this letter. The one sin-
gle point which it contains, is this query, "Whether the
commissary of South-Carolina has power given him from your
Lordship, to exercise any judicial authority against me, or any
other clergyman, who doth not belong to his province?" The
reason of my putting this question, I suppose your Lordship
will be apprized of, before this reaches your Lordship's hands.—
I have been lately cited to appear in an ecclesiastical court,
erected by the Reverend Mr. G, for not reading the com-
mon prayer in the meeting-house, which I was obliged to
preach in at Charles-Town, (unless I would be silent) because
the commissary would not let me have the use of his church. I
appeared, and have appealed, according to law, to four of his
majesty's commission- ers for reviewing appeals, to know, whether
the commissary ought not to have accepted a Recusatio judicis,
which I lodged in court. This, I suppose, they will deter-
mine. I only desire your Lordship's explicit opinion and deter-
mination, whether Mr. G, (supposing he hath power over
his own clergy,) has authority to erect such a court to arraign
me, who belong to the province of Georgia. The bearer hereof
will give me your Lordship's answer. In favoring me with
which, your Lordship will oblige, my Lord,
Your Lordship's obedient son and servant,
G. W.
LETTER CCXVII
To Mr, P__.
My dear Brother, Boston, Sept. 19, 1740.
I have just now read your kind letter. Blessed be the Lord,
for imparting somewhat of his divine presence to your soul.
O may he fill you brimful, and enable you so to preach, that
all your adversaries may not be able to gainsay or resist. Never
fear undertaking to preach without notes; remember the promise,
"Lo I am with you always, even to the end of the
world." By my master's leave, I propose to preach with you,
and dear brother W . I am a worm and no man: I de-
serve to be the outcast of the people. On Sunday I arrived at
Rhode-Island. Our Lord called some. Yesterday I came
hither, to-day I preached. May the Lord give a divine in-
crease to the seed sown! A great work is carrying on at
Charles-Town, The spirit of God is moving in different parts
of the world. O my dear, dear brother, let us up and be
doing, and the Lord will be with us. The world is lying
in the wicked one. May God make you instrumental to de-
liver thousands from his cursed slavery! With difficulty I re-
deem time to write this. Brother B , and B , are
with me. I will endeavour to give you notice of my coming.
In the meanwhile, cease not praying for
Your weak and unworthy brother,
G. W.
LETTER CCXVIII
To Mr. N__, at New-york.
My dear Brother, Boston, Sept. 23, 1740.
HITHER God brought me on Thursday evening: I
preached once on Friday, and twice every day since. The
power of the Lord advances sweetly. Our Lord, I believe,
will revive his work in the midst of the years; he enables me to
preach plainly. Some ministers, I hope, will be quickened, as
well as people. They attend, and are exceeding civil, as also
the governor. I wrote to you from Rhode Island; I shall call
there, as I come to you. On Monday, God willing, I shall
set out to see Mr. M , and on Monday fortnight hope to
go to Northampton. All the packets of letters came safe.
God bless my dear, dear Brother A, for his great care.
Friends from England write strange things; God, I believe,
calls me thither. Mr. J and the M .f, I think, are
sadly erroneous in some points of doctrine. When I see you,
I will communicate many particulars; now, I have scarce
time to write this. Our dear Lord sweetly fills me with his
presence. My heaven is begun indeed. I feast on the fatted
calf. The Lord strengthens me mightily in the inner man,
I find a few souls left in Sardis that have not defiled their gar-
ments. Excuse me to Mr. P; I have not time to answer
his kind letter! Adieu; I hope to be with you in about five
weeks.—I pray for dear Brother T, that he may espouse
more souls to the Lord Jesus Christ.—My hearty love
to all.
Ever yours,
G. W.
LETTER CCXIX
To Mr. A__,
My dear Brother A__, Boston, Sept. 23, 1740.
I Thank you for your letter: May the Lord enable me to
send you an answer of peace. Sinless perfection, I think, is
unattainable in this life. Show me a man that could ever
justly say, "I am perfect." It is enough if we can say so
when we bow down our heads and give up the ghost. In-
dwelling sin remains till death, even in the regenerate, as the
article of the church expresses it.—There is no man that liveth
and sinneth not in thought, word, and deed: However, to
affirm such a thing as perfection, and to deny final perseverance,
what an absurdity is this? To be incapable of sinning, and
capable of being finally damned, is a contradiction in terms.
From such doctrine may I ever turn away! Labour, dear Mr.,
J. to be holy, even as God is holy; but do not look for com-
plete perfection here below. What is this, but in effect to
vacate the righteousness of Christ? I hear many amongst you
who begun in the spirit, are now ending in the flesh. Christ
hath freely justified them, i.e., entitled them to all his merits,
and yet they must do so and so to keep themselves in a justified
state. Alas, this is sorry divinity; I have not so learned
Christ. No, his gifts and callings are without repentance.
Whom he loves, he loves to the end. Work I will, but not
to keep myself in a justified state. My Lord hath secured
that; but I will work to show my gratitude for his putting
me into a justified state. O that all would study the covenant
of grace. Dear Mr. A., I feel that I love you, and I find my-
self carried out to write in this manner. My Lord blesses
me with all spiritual blessings; he causes me to rejoice in his
salvation. I pray him to carry on his work in London, and to
keep his church from errors; but there must be a sifting as
well as a gathering time. It is meet that such offences should
come. All shall work together for good to those who are
called after God's purpose: They shall finally be saved. This
much comforts, dear Brother A.,
Your affectionate brother in Christ,
G. W.
LETTER CCXX
To H. H. in Wales.
Boston Sept, 24, 1740.
AND is dear Brother H, H. yet alive in body and soul?
Blessed be God, who causes those that wait on him to
renew their strength. I rejoice in your success: May you
mount with wings like eagles, walk and not be weary, run
and not be faint! You shall not be taken or hurt, till the
appointed hour is come. I hope your conversation was blessed
to dear Mr. W. O that the Lord may batter down his free-
will, and compel him to own his sovereignty and everlasting
love! Some of Lane society, I fear, are running into sad
errors; but this happens for our trial, especially mine. Those
that before, I suppose, would have plucked out their eyes for
me, now I suspect, I shall see very shy, and avoiding me.
This is my comfort, the Lord is a never-failing friend; his
truth will make its way in spite of all carnal reasoning. O
pray for me that I may have the spirit of judgment and a sound
mind. My coming to England will try my fidelity to my
Master: Nothing but his strength can enable me to hear all
contradictions with meekness, and to preach with love his ever-
lasting truths. O that all would study the covenant of grace!
The more I look into it, the more is my soul delighted.
Dear Brother H. adieu. My dear friend J. S. sits by and
cordially salutes you. I hope you have received my letters. I
expect to hear from you by dear Brother S. God is working
powerfully in America. He fills me with his presence, and causes
me to go on my way rejoicing. Grace! grace! I greet all
most affectionately, and am, dear Brother H,
Yours eternally,
G. W.
LETTER CCXXI
To the Rev. Mr. F. W.
Honoured Sir, Boston, Sept. 25, 1740.
THIS is sent in answer to your letter dated March 25.—
I think, I have for some time known what it is to have
righteousness, peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost. These, I
believe, are the privileges of the sons of God: But I cannot
say I am free from indwelling sin; no, I find a law in my
members warring against the law of my mind: This makes
me to cry out, even now, "Who shall deliver me from the
body of this death?" I thank God, our Lord Jesus Christ
will. I cannot see wherein the heterodoxy of the article of our
church doth consist, which says, "That this corruption re-
mains even in the regenerate;" and if that after conversion
we cannot sin in thought, word or deed, I do not know why
our Lord taught us to pray to our heavenly Father, "For-
give us our trespasses." I am sorry, honoured Sir, to hear
by many letters, that you seem to own sinless perfection as
this life attainable. I think I cannot answer you better, than
a venerable old minister in these parts answered a Quaker.
"Bring me a man that hath really arrived to this, and I will
pay his expenses, let him come from where he will." I know
not what you may think, I do not expect to say indwelling sin
is finished and destroyed in me, till I bow down my head and
give up the ghost. There must be some Amalekites left in the
Israelites' land, to keep his soul in action, to keep him humble,
and to drive him continually to Jesus Christ for pardon
and forgiveness. I know many abuse this doctrine, and per-
haps wilfully indulge sin, or do not aspire after holiness, be-
cause no man is perfect in this life. But what of that? must I
therefore assert doctrines contrary to the gospel? God forbid.
Whether the seventh to the Romans is applicable to a con-
verted person (as many very eminent saints have thought) is
not at all to the purpose: There are other passages of scrip-
ture, which plainly show that sinless perfection is not attainable
here below. Such as these, "There is no man that liveth
and sinneth not." "In many things we offend all." And I
know no sin except the sin against the Holy Ghost, of which
a child of God may not be guilty, if God should withdraw
his grace.
Whatever you may think of David, the scripture says, "He
was a man after God's own heart;" yet how did he fall?
And if you will not permit Peter to have been converted when
he denied his Master; what will you say to St. Paul? Did
not he sin, do you think, (at least were not his passions irre-
gular, and what is that but sin) when he spoke to the High
Priest, and called him whited wall? Besides, dear Sir, what a
fond conceit is it to cry up perfection, and yet cry down the doc-
trine of final perseverance? But this, and many other abstru-
dities you will run into, because you will not own Election:
And you will not own Election, because you cannot own it
without believing the doctrine of Reprobation. What then
is there in reprobation so horrid? I see no blasphemy in hold-
ing that doctrine, if rightly explained. If God might have
passed by all, he may pass by some. Judge whether it is not
a greater blasphemy to say, "Christ died for souls now in
hell." Surely, dear Sir, you do not believe there will be a
general gaol delivery of damned souls hereafter. O that you
would study the covenant of grace! O that you were truly
convinced of sin, and brought to the foot of sovereign grace!
Elisa Cole on God's sovereignty, and Veritas Redux, written by
Doctor Edwards, are well worth your reading. But I have
done; if you think so meanly of Bunyan, and the Puritan
writers, I do not wonder that you think me wrong. I find your
sermon has had its expected success; it hath set the nation a
disputing; you will have enough to do now to answer
pamphlets; two I have already seen. O that you would be
more cautious in casting lots! O that you would not be too
rash and precipitant! If you go on thus, honoured Sir, how
can I concur with you? It is impossible; I must speak what
I know.—Thus I write out of the fullness of my heart: I feel
myself to be a vile sinner.—I look to Christ; I mourn be-
cause I have pierced him. Honoured Sir, pray for me.
The Lord be with your dear soul. About Spring you may
expect to see.
Ever, ever yours in Christ,
G. W.
LETTER CCXXII
To Mr. G__ L__.
My dear Friend and Brother, Boston, Sept. 26, 1740.
I wrote to you about a month ago from Charles-Town.^-
Since I came here I have received two letters from you.
May the great God of heaven and earth bless your dear soul
for thus assisting his poor unworthy servant: A sense of my
ingratitude almost melts me into a flood of tears.—Indeed I am
the very chief of sinners.—O the love, the sovereign, distinguish-
ing, everlasting love of God my Savior! Praise him,
praise him, dear Mr. L, with all your soul.—I hope no-
thing will cause a division between me and Messrs. J^'s:
But I must speak what I know, and confute error wherefo-
ever I find it. About Spring I hope to come over if the Lord
will.—Be pleased to inform my friends, that last Sunday was
sevennight I arrived at Rhode-Island^ where I preached and read
prayers in the church on Monday and Tuesday to very large
and affected auditories.—On Wednesday I preached at Bristol^
in my way to Boston,—On Thursday night I got there, and
on Friday preached, and have preached once or twice every
day since.—Almost all the ministers, and vast bodies of people,
have been continually pressing to hear the word of God,
sometimes in the fields, and sometimes in the meeting-houses.
My health is much restored by the coolness of the air.—I in-
tend staying about a month in these parts, then to go to Phi-
ladelphia by land, from thence to Georgia by water, and I hope
to embark for England the beginning of the Spring.—You see
by this, dear friend, how our Lord works by my unworthy
hands. Ministers and people, I believe, will be much quick-
ened.—I hope your dear soul prospers. For Christ's sake
avoid disputing; study your heart and the scriptures; get nearer
and nearer to Christ, he will lead you into all truth. My
most tender love to all; if opportunity any way offers, every
letter received shall be answered by dear Mr. L,
The meanest of all your Christian friends,
G. W.
LETTER CCXXIII
To Mr. I__.
My dear Brother, I__, Boston, Sept. 26, 1740.
I thank you for your kind letter. It is the first I have re-
ceived from you since I left England.—I bless God the
work goes on in Yorkshire.—May our glorious, sin-forgiving
Lord bless you and your spiritual children more and more!
I find, our friends are got into disputing one with another.—
O that the God of peace may put a stop to it! I wish many
may not be building on a false foundation, and rest in a false
peace. They own free justification, and yet seem to think,
that their continuance in a justified state depends on their do-
ings, and their wills.—This, I think, is establishing a righte-
ousness of our own. My dear brother, if we search the scrip-
tures, we shall find that the 'justified' implies not only
pardon of sin, but also all its consequences.—"Thus (says
Saint Paul) those whom he justified, them he also glorified;"
so that if a man was once justified, he remains so to all eternity.—
Here lies the anchor of all my hopes.—Our Lord having
once loved me, he will love me to the end.—This fills me
with joy unspeakable and full of glory.—I now walk by faith.—
I work not to keep myself in a justified state, (for men or
devils can never pluck me out of Christ's hands,) but to ex-
press my love and gratitude for what Jesus hath done for my
soul. This, I think, is what the apostle calls 'faith working
by love.' My dear brother, my heart's desire and prayer to
God is, that we may all think and speak the same things.—
For, if we are divided among ourselves, what an advantage
will satan get over us? Let us love one another, excite all to
come to Christ without exception, and our Lord will show
us, who are his. The work of God goes on exceedingly in
America. The Lord is pleased to manifest himself unto my
soul more and more. I am a naughty, stubborn child; but my
dear Lord will have mercy because he will have mercy. It is
owing to his distinguishing love that I am not hardened. Here
is, and I believe will be a great quickening in these parts.—
The cloud seems to be moving. Perhaps in the Spring we
may meet face to face. With difficulty I get time to write
this, but I must answer dear Brother J's letter.—May
the Lord Jesus be continually with your spirit, and make your
soul brimful of peace and joy in the Holy Ghost. I love
you in the bowels of the crucified Lamb. May he unite us
more and more intimately to his dear self, and to one another.
Salute all that love him in sincerity.—Brethren, pray for us.—
That you may be kept by God's power to eternal salvation, is
the prayer of
Your most affectionate, though unworthy brother and
poor weak servant in Christ,
G. W.
LETTER CCXXIV
To Mr. W__ D__.
Dear Brother W__, Boston, September 28, 1740.
I thank you for your late letter from Oak; I wish it was
written with more life. I fear you are turning almost
to a spirit of bondage: but it is good for you to be sifted,
to make an experienced minister of Jesus Christ. I could
not but smile, to find you wink at the decency of my dress.
Alas! my brother, I have known long since what it is to be
in that state you are (in my opinion) about to enter into.
I myself thought once that Christianity required me to go
nasty, I neglected myself as much as you would have me, for
above a twelvemonth: but when God gave me the spirit of
adoption, I then dressed decently, as you call it, out of prin-
ciple: and I am more and more convinced, that the Lord
would have me act, in that respect, as I do. But I am almost
ashamed to mention any such thing: rather let us talk and
write of the love of Jesus; "Let us stand fast in the liberty
wherewith Jesus Christ hath made us free, and not be again
entangled in a yoke of bondage." God only knows whether
you have done right in leaving the university, or in declining
to exhort. If you do not preach till you are perfectly free
from all sin, I believe you will never preach again. I could
never hear of such a minister or Christian yet. My dear bro-
ther, I speak freely to you, because I love you in the bowels
of Jesus Christ, He sent his disciples to preach before they
were perfect; nay, when they were weak in grace. Exercise
the talents you have, and that is the way to get more. Thus
has God dealt with me for these seven years. "To him that
hath, shall be given." Many of our friends talk against elec-
tion: a good reason may be given. I believe they have never
taken pains to search into the true state of the case. What if
some abuse that doctrine; is it therefore false? No; by no
means. I am persuaded, if any of our friends would examine
their experiences, they would find that Jesus Christ freely
prevented them by his grace; that he compelled them to come
in; and that it is not owing to themselves, but to the will
and promise of God, that they are now kept in a state of
grace. But I will say no more. My dear brother, I love
you. May the Lord lead you into all truth. Our dear
Master is doing wonders among us. Praise him lustily, and
with a good courage. Adieu. Dear J S salutes
you and the brethren, as does
Yours affectionately,
G. W.
LETTER CCXXV
To the Rev. Mr. Z__ M__.
Reverend and dear Brother, Boston, Sept. 28, 1740.
I Received—I felt your letter. Surely there is a sympathy
between souls that have drunk into the same spirit. God
willing, I purpose to come and see you; and will endeavor to
send you timely notice: but oh do not expect too great things
from me; for if you do, who knows but my Lord may desert
me; and then what am I? Excuse the brevity of this. So
many persons come to me under convictions, and for advice,
that I have scarce time to eat bread. Wonderful things are
doing here. The word runs like lightning. Dagon daily
falls before the ark. I know you will, in spirit, pray that a
due sense of his own vileness may be continually given to
Your affectionate, though unworthy,
brother and servant in our glorious Emmanuel
G. W.
LETTER CCXXVI
To Mr. W__ , at Bristol.
Dear Brother W__, Boston, Sept. 28, 1740.
What mean you by disputing in all your letters?
May God give you to know yourself, and then
you will not plead for absolute perfection; or call the doctrine
of election a "doctrine of devils." My dear brother, take
heed; see you are in Christ a new creature. Beware of a
false peace; strive to enter in at the strait gate; and give
all diligence to make your calling and election sure. Remem-
ber you are but a babe in Christ, if so much. Be humble;
talk little, think and pray much. Let God teach you, and
he will lead you into all truth. I love you heartily: I pray
you may be kept from error, both in principle and practice.
Salute all the brethren. If you must dispute, stay till you are
master of your subject; otherwise you will hurt the cause you
would defend. Study to adorn the gospel of our Lord in all
things; and forget not to pray for
Your affectionate friend and servant,
G. W.
LETTER CCXXVII
To Mr. G__ L__.
My dear Brother L__, Boston, October 9, 1740.
I write to you again by this ship, though I have scarce
time to write a line. God works by me, I think, more
than ever. I am quite well in bodily health. Ministers as
well as people are stirred up, and the government is exceedingly
civil. In short, God is doing greater things than can be
expressed. Oh exhort all to pray, and to give thanks for me
with their whole hearts. The bearer brings the authentic
copy of my appeal; I sent you another copy before from Caro-
lina. Be pleased to keep this I have now sent, till you hear
of my coming to England: if I come in the Spring, I will
lodge it myself; if not, be pleased to lodge it for me, and I
will pay all expenses. O dear brother L, what a scene
of labors and sufferings lies before me! My dear Jesus will
make me more than conqueror over all: he strengthens and com-
forts, he converses with me by night and by day: he gives me
all peace and joy in believing. I pray God to keep our dear
brother; and others from a false stillness. I am sorry to
hear such errors are risen amongst the brethren. Adieu; the
Lord be with your spirit. I have already collected upwards
of four hundred pounds sterling for the Orphan-house. God
shows me that America must be my place for action. Once
more adieu. Cease not to pray for,
Ever, ever yours,
G. W.
LETTER CCXXVIII
To Mr. F__ H__.
Newhaven, Oct. 24, 1740.
My very dear Friend and Brother,
Your letter, just now brought to me by dear brother
N, gave me great comfort. With fear and trem-
bling, ever since the late disputations, have I opened letters
sent from Savannah; but blessed be God, our dear Lord is
with my dear friend H. Blessed be God, my family
dwell together in unity. The God of love fill you with all
peace and joy in believing. I hope a supply for your then pre-
sent wants, came to you soon after you sent your letters: since
that, I have sent from Boston 100 l. sterling; next week I
hope to send again from New-York, and before Christmas I
trust I shall see you face to face. Wonderful things God
does for me. I am enabled to preach and travel better than
ever. There has been joy in heaven, I believe, over many
souls repenting. There are some hopes of dear, dear brother
N's coming with me. Mr. B, one of the young
ministers of Long Island, with his wife, accompanies me also;
and another settled Christian, who holds and experiences the
truth as it is in Jesus. O that all my family may be thus
minded! I suppose by this time you know how matters are
determined for me, if Mr. C is arrived. God keeps me
in suspense: suspense did I say? Blessed be his holy name, I
am quite easy; I am persuaded he will choose for me a daugh-
ter of Abraham. I know not but it may be the divine
will that you should abide in Georgia, whilst I go to England.
Be resigned: see if God does not bring all things about for
your good: there is but little comfort to be expected in
England. I find I must, if I am faithful, oppose the errors of
many who, I believe, fear God: O that I may do it with
meekness and wisdom. Methinks I now long to be with you
all at Savannah. Pray for my speedy passage. I am glad God
is scourging out the children of Belial: you have often heard
me say God would do so. Never fear; a remnant will be
left, which shall take root downwards, and bear fruit upwards,
and yet fill the land. My dear brother, adieu: I am called
away. I love you more solidly than ever. Dear J S,
Mr. F, and P, love you too: we travel very com-
fortably: thousands of prayers are continually put up for me
and mine. My love to all, without exception. Feed the
lambs, study the purity of their hearts, and thereby rejoice
the soul of
Yours most affectionately and eternally in Christ Jesus,
G. W.
LETTER CCXXIX
To Mr. F__ W__
Dear and honoured Sir, Philadelphia. Nov, 9, 1740.
I Received your's, dated March II, this afternoon. Oh
that we were of one mind: for I am yet persuaded you
greatly err. You have set a mark you will never arrive at, till
you come to glory. I think few enjoy such continued manife-
stations of God's presence as I do, and have done, for some years;
but I dare not pretend to say I shall be absolutely perfect. O,
dear Sir, many of God's children are grieved at your prin-
ciples; O that God may give you a sight of his free, sove-
reign, and electing love! But no more of this: why will you
compel me to write thus? why will you dispute? I am wil-
ling to go with you to prison, and to death; but I am not
willing to oppose you. My heart is now much affected: in-
deed I love and honour you. Dear, dear Sir, study the cove-
nant of grace, that you may be confident with yourself: hasten
O Lord, the blessed time! I fancy I shall embark for Eng-
land about Spring; but am not yet determined. God shows
me his goodness plenteously every day. I dwell in Christ,
and Christ in me: glory be to sovereign grace. I seem to
have a new body, and the Lord Jesus greatly enriches my
soul. O I am a poor sinner! but our Lord frequently mani-
fests himself in such a manner, that it throws me into an agony
which my body is almost too weak to bear. Honoured Sir,
adieu. O build up, but do not lead into error, the souls once
committed to the charge of
Your affectionate, unworthy brother and servant,
in the loving Jesus,
G. W.
LETTER CCXXX
To Mr. H__ H__, in Wales.
Philadelphia, Nov. 9, 1740.
My very dear Brother H__,
I Wrote to you from Boston. Your letter, written near a
twelve-month ago, came to my hand this afternoon. My
soul is knit to you: we both speak and think the same things.
The Lord be with your spirit. Jesus manifests forth his
glory daily in these parts. Though I am such a vile, worth-
less, ungrateful wr&ch, yet the Lord fills me out of his di-
vine fullness day by day. His word is like a fire, and a ham-
mer: last week I saw many quite struck down. Our Lord
is working upon little children. America, ere long, will be
famous for Christians. Surely the candlestick will shortly be
removed from England. Little did I think, when Mr. E
wrote, that I should preach in all the chief places
of America: but that is now done;
glory be to rich, free, and
sovereign grace! Perhaps about Spring I may embark for my
native country: the Lord vouchsafe us a happy meeting. O
Wales, thou art dear to my soul! My love to all the brethren.
Dear brother H__, I pray God you may prosper, even
as your soul prospers. Expect another journal shortly: but
wait till we come to glory, fully to see and hear what God
hath done for
Your affectionate brother and servant in Christ,
G. W.
LETTER CCXXXI
To his Excellency Jonathan Belcher, Esq; in Boston.
Philadelphia, Nov. 9, 1740.
THOUGH late, I now snatch a few moments to send
your excellency my acknowledgments for all honors
received at Boston: they are much upon my heart. I pray
God to reward your excellency a thousand-fold.
Great things hath the glorious Emmanuel done for me and his
people on the way: the word has been attended with much
power. Surely our Lord intends to set America in a flame.
This week Mr. G T purposes to set out for Boston,
in order to blow up the divine fire lately kindled there. I
recommend him to your excellency as a solid, judicious, and
zealous minister of the Lord Jesus Christ: he will be ready
to preach daily: I suppose his brethren will readily open their
doors: may the Lord at the same time open the people's
hearts, that they may diligently attend to the things that shall
be spoken. Dear Mr. R grows in grace: I left him at
Brunswick full of gratitude for his late journey. I am per-
suaded it was of God. I hope he will be instrumental in
quickening both ministers and people. He is worthy of your
excellency's particular regard: under God he may need it.
I expect he will soon be reviled and persecuted for his blessed
Master's sake: may the Lord enable him to rejoice and
be exceeding glad. Dear Sir, the welfare of dear Boston
people, especially the welfare of your own soul, lies upon me
night and day. I remember your tears: I remember your ex-
cellency's words, "Mr. Whitefield, pray that I may hunger
and thirst after righteousness." O how did these words re-
joice me! for I thought your excellency wanted a more clear
view of your own vileness, and of the all-sufficiency of Jesus
Christ: I mean a more clear, experimental view: for what
is all head-knowledge without that of the heart? it only settles
people more upon their lees. May God give you to see and
to follow the simplicity of the blessed Jesus. Whilst you are
in the world, may you not be of it: may you be dead to mag-
nificence, and alive to nothing but what leads you directly to
your God.
Honoured Sir, I make no apology for this freedom: your
excellency bid me not spare rulers; no, not the chief of them.
Indeed I long after your salvation; O that I could do any-
thing to promote it! If my prayers, or anything within my
power may be instrumental thereunto, your excellency may
command, honoured Sir,
Your Excellency's obliged humble servant,
G. W.
LETTER CCXXXII
To Mr. M__, at London,
My dear Brother, Philadelphia, Nov. 10, 1740.
STILL my Lord shows me greater things. At New
York the Holy Ghost came down like a mighty rushing
wind. At Baskenridge still a greater awakening among young
and old. One that received Christ cried out, "He is come!
He is come!" The poor creature was wrapped up in the
Lord Jesus: and both there and at New York my soul was
taken almost out of the body. At Newark the Lord worked
wonderfully among some young men; and here at Philadel-
phia the word runs very swiftly. This afternoon, how beau-
tiful did the Lord appear in his sanctuary! I would cry out,
"How amiable are thy dwellings, thou Lord of hosts!" In
several places, almost as large as Northampton, are many faith-
ful laborers. We all think and speak the same things: O
that it was so at London! The Lord enables me to confute
error wherever I see it. Pray for me, that I may be made
faithful to my Lord and Master: he is dearer to me every
day: he will have mercy, because he will have mercy. See
brother L's letter. Another journal comes out shortly.
My hearty love to all. Stand fast in the faith: quit your-
selves like men: be strong. Above all, give thanks to God;
and pray in behalf of, dear Mr. M,
Your most affectionate brother and servant,
G. W.
LETTER CCXXXIII
To Mr. G__ L__.
Dear Brother L__, Philadelphia, Nov. 10, 1740.
I Wrote to you last week from New York. You may give
friends this brief account of me: On last Saturday evening I
arrived at this place, having preached at Staten Island, Newark,
Baskenridge, New Brunswick, and Trenton, in my way hither
from New York. A wonderful presence of God was observ-
able at New York, Baskenridge, and Newark. I preached here
twice yesterday, and also today, in a large house built by the
people since I was here last. It is an hundred feet long, and
seventy feet wide; and is intended for a school, as well as a
place for public worship. The walls are brick, and the roof
is now almost ready to be put up. God has remarkably ap-
peared in the carrying on the building; and the Holy Spirit
has sweetly moved on the hearers souls every time I preached
in it. I intend, God willing, to stay here this, and to em-
bark for Georgia the latter end of next week; and propose,
God willing, to return to England for a short time, in the
Spring.
The Lord highly favors me; I am more sick of myself,
and more in love with Christ daily: he is a dear, dear Mas-
ter: Oh that all would love him with all their hearts! Adieu:
it is late. The Lord be with your spirit.
Your affectionate friend, brother and servant in Christ,
G. W.
LETTER CCXXXIV
To the Rev. Mr. D__, at New Brunswick.
My very dear Brother, Salem, Nov. 20, 1740.
To the Rev. Mr. D , at New Brunswick.
My very dear Brother, Salem, Nov. 20, 1740.
EXCESS of business, not a want of love, prevented my writ-
ing to you from Philadelphia. I feel that I love you in the
bowels of the dearest Jesus, our ever blessed and glorious Emmanuel:
he hath done great things for me since you left us. Yesterday at
Cohansie the spirit of the Lord moved over the whole congre-
gation: what reason have we to be thankful for the great
things we both see and hear! My dear brother, indeed I de-
sire to lie in the dust. O how good is my Lord to me!
thoughts cannot conceive, or words express it! I long to be
in glory, that I may praise him as I would. I rejoice to hear
that the Lord is with you. Shortly, I believe, you will evan-
gelize. All friends kindly salute you. Adieu. In great
haste, I am
Your very affectionate, though unworthy brother
and servant in Christ,
G. W.
LETTER CCXXXV
To Mr. F__ H__.
Bohemia, (Maryland) Nov. 24, 1740.
My very dear Brother,
I Rejoice to hear that you are married: I salute your wife
and my sister in Christ: may you love one another, as
Christ and his church. I have lately conversed closely with
P B: alas! we differ widely in many respects;
therefore, to avoid disputation and jealousies on both sides, it
is best to carry on the work of God apart. The divisions
among the brethren sometimes grieve, but do not surprise me.
How can it be otherwise, when teachers do not think and
speak the same things? God grant we may keep up a cordial
undissembled love towards each other, notwithstanding our
different opinions. O how do I long for heaven! Surely,
there will be no divisions, no strife there, but who shall sing
with most affection to the Lamb that sitteth upon the throne.
Dear James, there I hope to meet thee; for the dear Jesus,
I believe, hath locked thee fast in his almighty arms. Lean
thou on his sacred bosom night and day; keep close to him,
and be what I long to be, a little child. Adieu. I am ready
to weep tears of love. My dear brother, I should be glad to
wash any of the brethren's feet: indeed I am now willing to
be the servant of all. The more the Lord honors me, the
more I feel my unworthiness. I am sometimes sick of love,
and often, often sick of self. O that God should have mercy
on such a sinner! Help me, dear James, to praise my Saviour.
A glorious church is raising in America. The Lord
mightily reveals his arm. It would please you to see his out-
goings, his stately steps in the great congregation. I only
want fellow-laborers. I look to Jesus for this, and for
everything. I desire you to print nothing against your con-
science: only do not immediately censure everything that
may not seem clear to you: our Lord may guide me, even
into things which as yet you may not see into. The day of
judgment will discover all. Adieu.
Ever, ever yours in our blessed Emmanuel,
G. W.
LETTER CCXXXVI
To the Rev. Mr. F. W.
Bohemia (Maryland) Nov. 24, 1740.
Dear and Honored Sir,
LAST night brother G—— brought me your two kind
letters. O that there may be harmony, and very inti-
mate union between us! Yet it cannot be, since you hold
universal Redemption. But no more of this. Perhaps, in
Spring, we may see each other face to face. This evening,
God willing, I propose to embark for Georgia. Wonderful
things our Lord brings to pass, in these parts, every day.
Here is a close opposition from some of the Presbyterian Clergy.
The seed of the serpent is the same in all, of whatever com-
munion. I expect much more opposition every hour. The
devil rages in London. He begins now to triumph indeed.
The children of God are disunited among themselves. The
king of the church shall yet overrule all things for good. My
dear brother, for Christ's sake avoid all disputation. Do
not oblige me to preach against you; I had rather die. Be
gentle towards the . They will get great advantage over
you, if they discover any irregular warmth in your temper. I
cannot for my soul unite with the Moravian Brethren, Honored Sir, Adieu!
Yours eternally in Christ Jesus,
G. W.
LETTER CCXXXVII
Saint George's (Pennsylvania) Nov. 24, 1740.
Dear Brother T__,
GOD has revived his own work in Philadelphia. His
glory filled the great house. The affairs belonging
thereto, I believe, are well settled. We have had precious
times at Cohansie, Salem, Fogs-mannor, Nottingham, Whiteclay,
Creek, and Bohemia. Brother G is come from England
very opportunely. Brother S comes about Christmas.
The brethren I think do grow, though sadly divided. But our
Lord will order all for good. — Upon several accounts, I
think it best to embark for England as soon as possible in the
Spring. O pray for me, that I may not by any means grieve
the children of God. I hope the weather is warm enough
for you. I trust our Lord has warmed and filled your dear
soul. Your brother Charles is with me. My dear fellow trave-
lers salute you and our dear brother R. My love to
all that love the Lord Jesus. The war goes on bravely between
Michael and the Dragon. Our dear Lord (O condescending love!)
is wondrous kind to your poor, weak,
unworthy brother and servant in Christ,
G. W.
LETTER CCXXXVIII
Dear Mr. F__, Reedy-Island, Nov. 26, 1740.
I Thank you for your letter. —You may print my life, as
you desire. God willing, I shall correct my two volumes
of sermons, and send them the very first opportunity. —Pray
write to me by every ship, that goes shortly to Charles-
Town.
I shall embark for England, God willing, about February,—
I desire I may hear from you there also, as often as possible.
I have prefaced Jenks, and Presumptuous Sinners Detected. Mr.
Bradford has the last, because he said he was to print it. You
may have it of him.—The Ornaments of the Daughter of Zion,
you may have hereafter. Dear Sir, Adieu. I do not despair
of your seeing the reasonableness of Christianity. Apply to
God; be willing to do the divine will, and you shall know
it. I have heard from Mr. S; all is well. To-day sev-
eral friends have taken leave of me at this place, waiting for
a fair wind in order to embark for Georgia. I think I have
been on shore 73 days, and have been enabled to travel up-
wards of 800 miles, and to preach 170 times, besides very
frequent exhortations at private houses. I have collected, in
goods and money, upwards of 700/. sterling, for the Orphan-
house; blessed be God! Great and visible are the fruits of
my late, as well as former feeble labors, and people in gene-
ral seem more eager after the word than ever. O the love of
God to
Your unworthy friend,
G. W.
LETTER CCXXXIX
To Mr. N. in New-York.
My very dear Brother, Charles-Town, Dec. 10, 1740.
IN eight days, the Lord brought us hither. We arrived
last night, when the Redeemer vouchsafed so to fill me with
his divine consolations, that I could scarce sleep. I have been
preaching this morning on the fire that happened of late from
these words, Isa. i. 9. " Except the Lord of Hosts had left
unto us a very small remnant, we should have been as Sodom,
and we should have been like unto Gomorrah." I am
now determined to see England as soon as possible. I have had
much of God's presence in our passage hither from Philadelphia,
and have many precious letters to send you. O follow
me with your prayers. I leave Charles-Town, God willing,
to-night, in order to hasten to their relief, and shall go in the
same sloop which brought me here, to my beloved Georgia.
As soon as possible, I will send you a long letter. In the mean
while, accept of my love from, dear Mr. N,
Your very affectionate friend and brother
and servant in Christ,
G. W.

LETTER CCXL
To Mr. G__ C__
On board the Savannah for Georgia, Dec. 11, 1740.
Dear Brother C__,
YOUR late letters, especially that which you sent me by
way of Charles-Town, made me smile. — I was glad to
find that you had not so far thrown off all outward things, as
to resolve not to write to any one; and I thought I knew the
frame of your heart, as though I was within you. My dear,
dear George C, I love you tenderly in the bowels of Jesus
Christ, and therefore would not have you be deceived.
Alas, why do you pervert this text of scripture, "Be still,
and know that I am the Lord," as if it was designed to keep
a Christian from striving, or meant stillness of body, or waiting
upon God only in silence? The expression is taken out of
the 46th Psalm, where God's fury against the heathen is
described in the most lively colors; and then lest his people
should complain of the severity of his dispensations, God com-
mands them to be still, "not to murmur or repine, knowing
that he was the Lord, and might do what seemed him good."
Thus Tate and Brady in their translations explain it, and this
is the true and genuine meaning of that sentence. It hath no
reference to stillness in prayer, or stillness of body. Dear bro-
ther, I speak to you plainly, because I love you. I think I
know what it is to wait upon the Lord in silence, and to
feel the spirit of God making intercession for me with groan-
ings which cannot be uttered. Often have I been at such
times filled as it were with the fullness of God, and I do now
daily carry on a communion with the most high God and the
ever-blessed Jesus. But all this I fear is contrary to the false
stillness you and some others seem to have fallen into. I was
just in the same case some years ago at Oxford, when I de-
clined writing, reading, and such like exercises, because I
would be still. The Lord convinced me; I pray he may also
convince you of this delusion. Dear George, consider how
contrary your maxim is to our Saviour's. You say, "Be still,"
He says, "Strive." As in an agony, "Strive that you may
enter in at the strait gate." Indeed, my dear man, I pity
you, knowing you have but a weak judgment, though a well-
meaning heart. You once thought that you was born again;
then, you found it was only an elapse of the Holy Ghost. You
used to say, you wished you could believe from experience in
the doctrine of election; now, you find as yet no evidence
within yourself that you are a real Christian. You take too
much refuge, I fear, in the doctrine of universal redemption.
It is the finest doctrine in the world to cause a soul to be
falsely still, and to say Peace, Peace, when there is no peace.
You seem to insist upon sinless perfection, and to think a man
hath no real salvation till he literally cannot commit sin. From
whose experience do you write this? Not from your own, dear
George; for I much question, if ever your heart was truly
broken or had a saving closure with Christ. You seem to
mention Peter Bochler as an instance; but alas, though he has
been washed in the blood of the Lamb, so as to be justified from
all his sins, yet like me his feet want washing still, and will,
till he bows down his head and gives up the ghost. I have
conversed with him intimately. Take heed, brother, of having
anything too much in admiration, or of thinking you must ne-
cessarily find Christ at such and such a place. You have
been at M. I believe you have seen many dear children
of God; but have you returned home with Christ in your
heart? Your letters do not speak much improvement in the
school of Christ. If God loves you, he will let you see
the vanity of your present imaginations, and bring you to see
that salvation is not of him that willeth, or of him that runneth,
but of God that showeth mercy. Dear George, be not
given to change; be not too fond of new things. "To the law
and to the testimony," and see what Christ and his apostles
have spoken. I speak this out of love, and not in reference
to myself. If God blesses another ministry to your soul, I
rejoice, yea and will rejoice. But if I see you fall into errors,
do not be angry if I tell you the truth. If you are, I will not-
withstanding love and pray for you. That errors are crept in
among you, I think is too plain: but I suspend my judg-
ment till the Spring, when, God willing, I hope to be in
London. In the mean while pray for me, that I may with
joy bear to be deserted by those, who once were blessed and
awakened by my ministry, and to whom I am a spiritual fa-
ther, though they may have many instructors. Dear George,
may the Lord be with you. He only knows how dear you
are to my heart. It is near midnight; but it was much upon
my heart to write you this letter. That God may sanctify
it to your edification and comfort, is the hearty prayer of
Your affectionate friend, brother
and servant in Christ,
G. W.
LETTER CCXLI
To the Rev. Mr. C—-.
Good-Hope (South-Carolina) Jan. 1. 1741.
Rev. and dear Sir,
I am now going to Charles-Town, in order to embark for
England; the cloud of God's providence seems to be
moving that way; I have enjoyed much of the divine presence
since I left Boston, and have had a comfortable Christmas with
my dear family at Georgia. At my return, I found my Orphan-
household removed from Bethesda to Ebenezer, and great improve-
ments made during the time of my absence. The great house
will be finished, God willing, so as to be habitable, in about
two months. It would have been finished so far by this time,
if the Spaniards had not taken a schooner loaded with bricks
and other provisions to a considerable value; but God about
the same time stirred up the heart of a planter in South-Caro-
lina, lately brought home at the orphan-house to God, to send
my family some rice and beef. At other times, when they have
wanted food, the Indians have brought plenty of venison. God,
every day, more and more convinces us that this work is of
him. His power has been made known, especially among
the young ones. I bless God, I have settled my family to my
great satisfaction, and verily believe I shall live to see great
things come from the Orphan-house. God works upon the
hearts of the labourers. One woman hath had a glorious dis-
covery of Christ made to her heart: last week, two or three
men were brought into heart-distress, and another young
man that came to see us, was made so sick of sin, as to feel
the want of, and to inquire after the great and all-powerful
physician of souls. My family, I think, consists now of 89
persons. Next year my expenses will be contracted much;
but at present, I am in debt about 500/. sterling. However,
I know in whom I have believed. One who is able to pay it.
My public accounts will be published as soon as I arrive at
London, with a prospect of the Orphan-house, and other little
houses and gardens annexed unto it. I am now at the house
of one Mr. Jonathan B—•, who, I trust, with his brother Mr,
H B , and another young man, lately a player in
New-York, are settled by a living faith in Jesus Christ.
The latter, I intend for the ministry. Mr. H B 's
wife died not long since, rejoicing in God her Saviour. Sev-
eral others also in these parts are grown in grace, and Mr.
C 's ministry hath been much blessed.—Satan hath been
sowing tares in old England. Oh that Boston ministers and
people may pray for me! Indeed, I love them in the bowels
of the blessed Jesus. Vale! longum est, spero non in aeternum,
vale. That Christ's kingdom may flourish in your heart,
and that you may greatly promote it in the souls of others, is
the hearty prayer of. Reverend and dear Sir,
Your affectionate unworthy fellow-servant,
in our common Lord,
G. W.
LETTER CCXLII
To the Rev. Mr. C__.
Dear and Reverend Sir, Charles-Town, Jan. 12, 1741.
LAST Saturday I was taken up for being concerned in
correcting the enclosed printed letter, written by Mr. H—
B—n, whose conversion you have an account of in the
other letter sent herewith. I think it may be for God's glory
to have them all printed in Boston. I am bound over to appear
next sessions, as well as Mr. B . He, I believe, for li-
belling the king, and I for libelling the clergy, in saying they break
the Canons daily. I think, dear Sir, these are earnest of what
I must expect to meet with in my native country. Opposition,
as yet, seems to be only like a cloud rising out of the sea, no
bigger than a man's hand. Perhaps it will gather to a great
body, and break upon the church of God. Our Lord will
be our refuge in every storm. He is much with my soul, and
fills me abundantly, I could almost say superabundantly, with
his presence. We have seen precious times. One person had
a glorious discovery of Christ about two days ago. I ex-
pect my family will be like the burning bush. I find I am in
debt for them upwards of six hundred pounds: but the Lord
will provide. —My most tender love awaits all that love him.
I am to appear at the sessions by an attorney. Dear Sir, re-
member,
Ever yours in Christ,
G. W.
LETTER CCXLIII
To the Rev. Mr. C__, at Rhode Island.
Reverend and Dear Sir, Charles-Town Jan. 26, 1741.
I Snatch a few moments to write you a line before I embark
for England. Blessed be God, you are near your desired
haven. Yet a little while, and you shall safely arrive in Abra-
ham's bosom. O mare sequar, vos, si mihi non adversum est. — Great
things God is doing daily. The kingdom of heaven (I hope)
is at hand. I am bound over to appear at the sessions here,
by my attorney, for libelling the clergy, because I corrected
the letter enclosed. A scene of suffering lies before me, but
wherefore should I fear? Our Lord strengthens me mightily
in the inner man. We have had much of his presence in our
assemblies. But I must have done. Dear and Reverend Sir,
adieu. I scarce expect to see you again in the flesh; but this
is my comfort, I shall see and rejoice with you above. There,
I will sit and tell you what God hath done for
Your unworthy brother and servant in Christ Jesus,
G. W.
LETTER CCXLIV
To the Rev. Mr. C__, in Boston.
Reverend and dear Sir, Charles-Town, Jan. 16, 1741.
THOUGH I have packed up two letters for you already,
yet I cannot refrain from sending you a third. Just
now I was favored with yours dated last December 1. Indeed,
it gave me much comfort, and endeared the writer of it to me
more and more. Sir, why am I thus highly favored! I now
wish to sink exceeding low, and cry out, Grace, grace! O
the love of God! The sovereignty of Christ! The un-
changeable loving-kindness of our heavenly Father! Excuse
me, dear Mr. C; my heart is full. I want for all men
to love the Lord Jesus. It greatly rejoices me, to hear so
many are coming to him. He is a loving tender master. He
attends to my minutest wants, and surprisingly helps me in
every emergency. I thank dear Mr. C, for the kind token
of his love. Good measure pressed down and running over, may
God return into your bosom! You will be pleased to correct
the press. I am filled with comfort to hear of the conduct of
the dear governor, &c. I cannot but think our Lord will let
his word run, and be abundantly glorified in America. Boston
people are much upon my heart. The memory of their forefa-
thers is precious to my soul. May you live to see the spirit of
scriptural Puritanism universally prevail! I hope you will write
every opportunity. If I am in prison, it will make me arise
at midnight to sing praises to God, to hear that Boston people
are alive to Christ. At present, my heart is full of peace
and joy. We have had solemn meetings. I am much
strengthened on every side; but I must not say more. Time
is short. Dear Mr. C, adieu. May the Lord be with
you and yours, I could now drop a tear of love. —My love
to all,
I am yours &c.
G. W.
LETTER CCXLV
To Mr. W__ D__, at Boston.
On board the Minerva, for England, Jan. 17, 1741.
Dear Sir,
MR. P hath just brought me your kind letter. Blessed
be God, that his word runs and is glorified in Boston.
Surely, dear Sir, I shall never forget that people; in-
deed, they are very near and dear unto my soul. May those
of your own household, in particular, be not only convicted
but converted; may the dear Jesus fill you with all peace and
joy in believing, and enable you to pray for, dear Sir,
Yours in the blessed Jesus
G. W.
P. S. Excuse great haste; our ship is just under sail. My
dear companions kindly salute you and yours.
LETTER CCXLVI
To Mr. Wm. G__.
On board the Minerva, Feb. 8, 1741, in latitude 35, 24 N.
My dear brother,
SEE how soon I write to you, and from thence infer how
I love you. Whether it proceeds from the pride and
naughtiness of my heart, I cannot tell; but, I frankly confess,
I love to see persons humble, kind, and courteous to those,
whom God hath made their spiritual fathers. I believe it is
well pleasing to God, and very amiable in the sight of all
good men. Your Christian grateful behavior to me in this
respect, has much endeared you to me. God only knows
how I love you. I bear you upon my heart, and often se-
cretly sigh out before the Lord,—"O let my dear brother
G live before thee." This is the desire of my soul for you.
I cannot wish you a better thing. Yet a little while, and we
shall be together again. But, before that time, I expect to
suffer great things. The Lord is able to deliver me out of
all. I have just now experienced his divine assistance in com-
posing a sermon. This is the sixth which he has enabled me
to finish, since I have been on board. O my dear brother,
love a precious Christ, and show it by adorning his gospel
in all things. He has highly favored you, indeed he hath.
If you and I are not eminently holy, if you and I think
anything too much to be done for the Lord, we are of all
men the most ungrateful. O the love of Christ! I feel it,
I feel it. God now sheds it abroad in my heart. May it
abundantly also be shed on you by the Holy Ghost. Write
to me if in prison, my friends will bring it to me there. God
will hear me for you even in a dungeon. Methinks I
see you weep; but weep not for me, unless it be before the
Lord, and then I care not how soon you retire, and pour
out your prayers in behalf of, dear Mr. G,
Your affectionate friend, brother and servant,
G. W.
LETTER CCXLVII
To Mrs. L__, at Charles-Town.
On board the Minerva, Feb. 11, 1741.
Dear Mrs L__,
YOU was upon the mount when I left Charles-Town; I
hope you have not thrown yourself down. Keep close
to Christ, and cast not off your first love. Remember what
God has done for your soul. Forget not the glorious dis-
covery Jesus Christ has made of himself to your heart; and
though a cloud should overshadow you, let not Satan make
you doubt of your being a child of God. O Mrs. L__,
how holy ought you to be in all manner of conversation and
godliness! Why are you taken? Why are you in the arms of
everlasting love? Methinks I hear you cry out, Grace! grace!
And well you may; for indeed you are saved by grace.
The free grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you
now and forever more. Blessed be God, I experience much
of it in the ship. I hope divine grace moves me to send you
this small letter. If God blesses it to your soul, put up a
short prayer for
Your affectionate friend and servant in Christ,
G. W.
LETTER CCXLVIII
To Mrs. W__, at James-Island.
Dear Madam, On board the Minerva, Feb. 11, 1741.
MY heart's desire and prayer to God is, that you may be
saved. I hope you will find, it is not impossible for you
to be born again when you are old. God forbid. Though
at the eleventh hour, I trust our Lord will meet you, and
cause you, whenever you depart, with good old Simeon, to de-
part in peace. I heartily thank you, madam, for all favors
conferred on me and mine. We have not forgotten you on
board. I do not forget to mention you in my secret prayers.
May God reveal his dear Son in your soul, and fill you with
all peace and joy in believing! O what a staff will this be to
you in your old age! How pleasantly then will you walk by
your vault, and say, "There shall I lay my weary bones ere
long." I hope you do not startle at the thoughts of death.
Believe in Christ. Get a saving interest in his blood, and
then you may cry out, "O death, where is thy sting! O
grave, where is thy victory?" Blessed be God, the prospect of
death is pleasing to my soul. I would not live here always:
I want to be gone. That you and I, whenever our appointed
time is come, may live with Christ, is the earnest prayer of,
madam.
Your obliged friend and servant in Christ,
G. W.
LETTER CCXLIX
Dear Mrs. T. On board the Minerva, Feb. 12, 1741.
MUST I pray for you in the language of Martha and
Mary, saying, "Lord, she whom thou lovest is
sick!" Or hath he who touched Peter's wife's mother, rebuked
the illness that was coming upon you, when I saw you last,
and caused it to leave you? But, however the Lord has dealt
with you, I hope he hath been glorified in and by you. I
heard he had by his word and spirit spoken to your soul, and
given you satisfaction, that he had loved you with an ever-
lasting love. I rejoice in it from my soul. The Lord in-
crease your comforts daily, and show you all his glory. Dear
Mrs. T-, think often of your departed sister. Follow her
as she did Christ; and then shortly, where she is you shall
be also. O the happiness she now enjoys! It is too dazzling
for mortal eyes, I want to leap my seventy years, and fly away
to God. Well, it will not be long. Dear Mrs. T—-, let
us patiently tarry till our change come. Our Lord will
carry us safe through time, and waft us triumphantly into
eternity. The love of Christ constrained me to write these
lines; accept them for his sake, from
Your affectionate friend and servant in Christ,
G. W.
LETTER CCL
To Mr. H__, at Port-Royal, South-Carolina.
Dear Mr. H. On board the Minerva, Feb. 16. 1741.
THE love of Christ constrains me to write you a line,
though as yet no further than the western islands. I
trust the Lord hath called you by name, and enabled you to
say "Speak Lord, for thy servant heareth." Who knows but
he may call you yet further, even to minister before him?
Whether it be so or not, make it your daily study to prepare
your heart to serve the Lord in any station. To be a door-
keeper in the house of God, is a glorious post. Surely, you
and I may sing of mercy and electing love. How often have
we acted a part for the devil? The remembrance of it is grie-
vous unto me. Let us both now labor daily to act a part for
God. He heaps kindnesses on me every hour. We have
hitherto had a wonderfully pleasant passage. I hope it is in
some measure owing to your prayers. Let this encourage you
to pray again. Our God is a God hearing prayer. I write
now, lest excess of business should prevent my writing in Eng-
land. The Lord is girding me for the battle, and strength-
ening me mightily in the inner man. "O give thanks unto
the Lord of all Lords, because his mercy endureth for ever."
You will not fail writing to
"Your affectionate friend, brother and servant in Christ,
G. W.
LETTER CCLI
To the Reverend Mr. C__, in Charles-Town.
My dear Brother, On board the Minerva, Feb. 17, 1741.
THE Lord hath been with me, and is now with me in
an especial manner. I have been enabled to prepare
nine discourses for the press. My body waxes stronger, and
last night the great God in a glorious manner filled and over-
shadowed my soul. I am panting after the complete holiness
of Jesus my Lord. I have various scenes of action lying be-
fore me, and am waiting upon the Lord my God for direc-
tion. He assures me that he will be with me. He saith unto
me, "Fear not, speak out, no one shall set upon thee to hurt
thee." Dear Mr. C , God's goodness quite surprises
me. I cannot express myself better, than in a stanza or two
of Erskine in his Paraphrase upon Solomon's song.
I
What wonders Lord dost thou perform,
That stoop'st thus so low,
To put thy beauty on a worm
And then commend it so..
II
What, dost thou praise a native black?
I blush to find it true;
O lend me words to render back
The praise to whom 'tis due.
hope my love will find acceptance with all your flock
who know me, and who love the Lord Jesus in sincerity. I
have often comforted myself and companions with this saying,
"Now Mr. C and our other friends are praying for
us." At the receipt of this, turn your prayers into praises,
and then turn your praises again into prayers, in behalf of,
dear Mr. C ,
Your affectionate brother and fellow-laborer
in Christ Jesus,
G. W.
LETTER CCLII
To Mr. H. B.
On board the Minerva, Feb. 16, 1741.
My dear brother in Christ,
BEFORE this is brought to your hands, I suppose you
will have been arraigned before the Chief Justice. I am
persuaded our Lord will plead on your behalf, and strengthen
you with his mighty power in the inner man. The greater
progress you make in the divine life, the more you will dis-
cover of the enmity that is in the seed of the serpent. It bruised
our master's heel; it will also bruise ours. Here is our com-
fort, God who cannot lie, hath told us, that "we shall bruise
his head." In the strength of this promise, I can give men
and devils the challenge. Whole legions are ready to beset
me. By the help of my God, I shall triumph over all,—I
hope we shall grow in grace before we meet again. You and
I have weak crazy tabernacles; I hope you rejoice in the pros-
pect of putting them off shortly; blessed be God, I do.—
Dear Sir, get acquainted more and more with electing love;
study the covenant of redemption, and see how God loved
you with an everlasting love. This will cause you to glory
only in the Lord, and to pass through the valley of the sha-
dow of death, with a full assurance of faith; knowing that
Christ hath engaged to lodge you safe in eternal glory.
Thither your dear wife is gone before us; I often think of,
I could almost say envy her; but perhaps that is wrong. Yet
a little while, and our precious Lord shall take both you,
and
Your affectionate friend, brother,
and servant in Christ,
G. W.
LETTER CCLIII
To Mr. B___, at Port-Royal.
Dear Mr. B. On board the Minerva, Feb. 16. 1741.
I Hope you will never forget that day, hour, or moment,
wherein God met you at Savannah. If you have in some
measure, do so no more. "Awake thou that sleepest, and
Christ shall give thee light." Love not the world, neither
the things that are in the world. No man can serve two
masters. Use the world, but let it be as though you used it not.
The fashion of this world will soon, very soon, fade away. Dear
Mr. B , I am persuaded, will not be offended at this plain
dealing. He knows I love him. God knows it also. With
much affection, I subscribe myself
Your friend and servant,
G. W.
LETTER CCLIV
To Mr. B.
Dear Mrs. B, On board the Minerva, Feb, 16, 1741.
WHEN you read that Jesus loved Lazarus, Mary, and
their sister Martha, do you not make a particular ap-
plication to your own family? I think our Lord has been
equally kind to your household. Walk as becometh members
of the household of faith. I hope you have had full satisfaction
about your state, and know assuredly that Christ is your
Saviour. If not, be not discouraged; go on; the way of duty,
is the way of safety. By-and-by your soul shall magnify the
Lord, and your spirit rejoice in God your Saviour. This is
the hearty desire of, dear Mrs. B ,
Your affectionate friend and servant in Christ,
G. W.
LETTER CCLV
To Mr. J— B—.
Dear Mr. B—, On board the Minerva, Feb. 16. 1741.
YOUR name, 'Jonathan,' puts me in mind of a good old
testament worthy. Follow him in his faith, and dare
to scale the wall of the Philistines. Be not afraid, though al-
ready bound over as a libeller -^
shortly you shall shine in the
kingdom of your Father; I say, your Father; for God is your
God, and will be your guide and guard unto death. Does
not this astonish you? Do not you feel your heart melt? Are
you not ready to cry out, "Why me, Lord?" The oftener
you repeat such language the better. I love to see a soul lie in
the dust under a sense of electing love; you and yours have
been highly favored. May God give you all grace to walk
worthy of the holy vocation wherewith you are called. I write
this out of the fullness of my heart. Though not present,
yet I fain would converse with you. O that I may see you
grown in grace! Remember me to your wife. The Lord
be with you both: He hath been, he is now with me. You
are often upon my heart. God reward you for your kind-
ness to the Orphans. Do not slack your hands towards them.
Our bountiful master will richly reward you. Go on stead-
ily in the use of, but do not trust in ordinances. You know
what I mean, be steady and bold, yet meek and catholic in
your conversation and practice; and if God hath influenced
you by my ministry, give him the glory, and for Christ's
sake pray for
Your affectionate brother and servant in Christ,
G. W.
LETTER CCLVI
To Mr. B__, in Charles-Town,
Dear Mr. B. On board the Minerva, Feb. 16, 1741.
I Think of you often, indeed I do. I long to hear that com-
plete salvation is come to your soul. I say complete sal-
vation, for my dear friend knows that reformation is not con-
version. O that you may experience a life hid with Christ
in God! Some who seemingly put their hands to the plough,
have already shamefully looked back; will Mr. B. also go
away? Methinks I hear him say, "Where shall I go?
Jesus Christ alone hath the words of eternal life." True,
Jesus alone is the way, the truth and the life; flee, flee to him,
my dear friend; with arms he stands ready to embrace, and will
save you to the uttermost. Remember, my friend, the vows
of the Lord are upon you. These hands reached out to you
the sacred symbols of his precious body and blood. These
eyes saw you eat and drink of his bread and his wine. O do
not betray, but manfully stand up for the Lord Jesus. You
was once bold for Satan, be now bold for your Christ. His
love excites me to write to, and pray for you. Your wife also
I entreat the Lord to bless, together with your children. My
friends join me in hearty wishes for your welfare. I am, dear
Mr. B ,
Your affectionate friend and servant in Christ,
G. W.
LETTER CCLVII
To the Rev. Mr. D__, at Edinburgh.
On board the Minerva, Feb. 16, 1747.
Reverend and dear Sir,
IF I mistakenot, Mr. M. informed me, that you was entered
into the ministry; I pray God to enable you to make full
proof of it. O dear Sir, how holy ought we to be, who are
called to stand before the Lord. —When I consider the great-
ness of the office and my own unworthiness, I am sometimes
quite abashed. This promise, "Lo I am with you always,"
is, my daily support. Blessed be God, I find it fulfilled in my
soul. A great work is begun in America, at Georgia, South-
Carolina, New-York, Philadelphia, and New-England. God
has confirmed the word by spiritual miracles and signs. You
will see what I have wrote to dear Mr. T. Your assistance
in respect to the Orphan-house will be very acceptable. I am
several hundreds of pounds in debt on that account. The
God whom I serve is able to discharge it. You have heard of
the liberality of the New-England people; dear Mr. D.,
God's goodness astonishes me. What! can I think anything
too much to do, or to suffer for so dear a Master? I was lately
bound over at Charles-Town in South-Carolina, for libelling the
clergy. The libel, falsely so called, I shall soon send you after
my arrival. Thus opposition is coming on gradually: pray
that the Lord may cover me with all his armor. I am a weak,
defenseless creature in myself; Jesus alone is my strength
and my Redeemer. I write this on board, that you may
know, you are not forgotten; no, though I never saw you in the
flesh, you are much beloved by, dear Sir,
Your affectionate brother and fellow-laborer
in our dear Lord's vineyard,
G. W.
LETTER CCLVIII
To the Rev, Mr. T__, at Edisto.
On board the Minerva, Feb. 17, 1741.
Dear Mr. T.,
PROVIDENCE prevented my coming to see you at
Edisto; however, I must not omit writing to you now.
How is it with your heart? I hope you are not uxorious;
take heed, my dear B—, take heed. Time is short. It remains
that those who have wives, be as though they had none. Let
nothing intercept, or interrupt your communion with the
bridegroom of the church. I hope you do not feel such damps
of soul, as you used to complain of. May the Lord of glory
dispel every black cloud, and cause you continually to rejoice
in his salvation. You have strong passions. The Lord Jesus
is stronger: In his strength may you subdue them, till you are
meek as a lamb, and are become a very little child. I write
thus, because I pray for you most heartily. —Deal with me in
the same manner; and now, dear brother, farewell. The Lord
be with you. He is pleased to refresh my soul, and give me
the prospect of a short passage. I commend myself and affairs
to the prayers of your flock, and I earnestly recommend you
to the God of all grace. That he may bless you and give you
an inheritance among all them that are sanctified, is the ear-
nest prayer of, dear Mr. T.,
Your affectionate brother and fellow-laborer in the Lord,
G. W.
LETTER CCLIX
To Mrs. B__, in Charles-Town.
Dear Mrs. B. On board the Minerva, Feb. 17, 1741.
I Am much obliged to you in many ways. The Lord reward
you a thousand-fold. Your prayers are heard. God is
carrying us upon the wings of the wind. The angel of the
covenant accompanies us in the way. The present season is a
time of refreshing to my soul. I hope it will be a profitable
voyage. I think I see more into the wickedness of my own
heart, and the unsearchable riches of the Lord Jesus, who
hath redeemed me by his precious blood. I believe you can say
so: Why do you shake your head? Woman, why doubtest
thou? Has not the Lord visited your soul? Have you not
heard him say in his word, applied by his spirit, "I have loved
thee with an everlasting love?" And do you think God would
tell you so, if it was not so? Away therefore with all desponding
fears; come boldly, with a full assurance of faith, and draw
water plentifully out of the wells of salvation. O that all
were comforted, as I am now comforted of God. I would
not eat my spiritual morsels alone. I hope, a letter from you
will acquaint me, how good the Lord has been to your soul.
I have no greater joy, than to hear that my Christian friends
walk in the truth. The Lord be with you. Remember me
to your father and sisters. That you all may be true members
of the household of faith, prays _
Your affectionate brother and servant
G. W.
LETTER CCLX
To Mr. B. and his wife at Bethesda.
Dear brother B__, On board the Minerva, Feb. 17, 1741.
WHEN I left Charles-Town, the Lord seemed to give
me a full assurance, that we should have a speedy
passage. We have hitherto had scarce any contrary winds,
and are now very near the Western Islands. We had one storm
the first week, but almost ever since have been favored with
weather as well as wind. O that you would call the family
together, and praise the Lord for the mercies conferred on us
the unworthiest of the sons of men! I do not know that I
have failed praying for you one day, since I have been out. I
long to hear what the Lord hath done for your souls. What
say you? Do you live in love? Do you strive together with me
in your prayers? Are any of the Orphan Lambs bleating after
their great Shepherd? Is your mouth opened? Is your heart
enlarged? Is your soul swallowed up in God? Does Bethesda
answer its name? Is it, indeed, an house of mercy? These
questions, I hope to have answered in the affirmative. If you
ask, how it is with my soul? Blessed be God, I can reply,
"Very well." The Lord gives me a feeling possession of
himself. I have been enabled to compose nine discourses for the
press. God willing, you shall hear from me often. I write
this, that I may be ready, if I should hear of any ship coming
your way immediately upon my arrival; receive it as a token
of my love, which God knows is unfeigned, from
Your affectionate brother and servant in Christ,
G. W.
LETTER CCLXI
To Mr. J. B__, Charles-Town.
Dear Mr. B__, On board the Minerva, Feb. 17, 1741.
I Think I owe you a letter; I believe you love me in the
bowels of Jesus Christ. I hope our love is reciprocal.
How can it be otherwise with those, who have drunk of the
same spirit? I long for that happy time, when we shall be
swallowed up in the vision and full fruition of the glorious
Godhead. The bunch of grapes makes me long to eat of the
full clusters in the heavenly Canaan. The first-fruits make
me pant after the full harvest. Perhaps you may go and par-
take of it first, and drink new wine before me in the kingdom
of our Father; I hope I shall not stay long after you, if not
called before. My soul is sick of love. Nothing can satisfy
it, but the full sight and enjoyment of Christ. He now visits
my soul, and causes it mightily to rejoice in his salvation. How
lovingly he hath dealt with me in other respects, letters sent
to other friends can best inform you. Haste, read, hear, and
join with them in giving thanks and praying for
Your affectionate friend and brother and servant in Christ,
G. W.
LETTER CCLXII
To Mrs. S—, in Charles-Town.
Dear Mrs. S—, On board the Minerva, Feb. 17, 1741.
My soul is now in a heavenly frame, swallowed up in
God, and melted down by the love of my dear Lord
Jesus. It is aimed too big to speak. I will give it vent by
writing to you. Our master hath been exceeding gracious,
and has shown me several tokens for good, which I desired of
him in secret prayer. Last night, I think I received as full sa-
tisfaction as I could desire, in respect to my marriage. I believe
what I have done, is of God; though I know not when my heart
was more disengaged from earthly thoughts than now. I on-
ly desire, that the dear Jesus may be glorified in me, whether
it be by life or by death. I depend on your sending me a par-
ticular account of affairs at Charles-Town. I have wrote to
many; you will hear how my letters are received. I shall be
glad to hear how it is with your own soul. I beseech you to
live near to Christ, and to keep up a holy walk with God.
Be inward with God in your duties. Trust and hang on
God, even when he hides himself from you. He will be your
guide unto death. Hunger and thirst daily after the righteous-
ness of Christ. Be content with no degree of sanctification.
Be always crying out, "Lord, let me know more of myself
and of thee; O let me receive grace for grace of thy dear Son."
This, at present, is the full desire of my soul. I am persuaded
the Lord will satisfy it. God is love; we cannot think too
highly of him; we cannot expect too great things to be done
by him. His right hand, I believe, will bring mighty things to
pass. I am now entering on a scene of trials. The Lord
hath sent me on the seas to prepare me for them. Not that I
depend on any stock of grace already received. I would look
to Christ continually. But whither am I running? I forget
myself. I almost fancy, I am talking with you. I have only
room to acquaint you, that dear
J— S— sits by me, and
cordially salutes you, with
Your affectionate friend, brother, and servant in Christ,
G. W.
LETTER CCLXIII
To the Rev. Mr. S—, Charles-Town.
Rev. and dear Sir, On board the Minerva, Feb. 1741.
YOU have been very kind to me in many respects; but I
have been ungrateful to you, and infinitely more so to
my gracious God. I have not failed frequently to bemoan
my unworthiness. Since I have been on board, the Lord
hath heard the voice of my weeping, and now fills my soul
with all peace and joy in believing. I have been much assisted
in composing sermons for the press. At present my soul is
closely adverting to God, who, I believe, will bring me safe to
glory. My bodily strength is much renewed. In short, I am
comforted on every side. Dear Sir, praise the Lord in my
behalf, O let us magnify his name together. I hope you feel
what it is to have fellowship with the Father and the Son, and
experience the influences of the Holy Ghost, in delivering
your blessed master's message. I salute Mr. P. and your
whole church. My request is, 'Brethren, pray and give
thanks for us.'—When you write to New-England, pray re-
member me to all friends in the kindest manner. That coun-
try, and the people, lie very near my heart. I hope to be fa-
vored with a line from you ere I return from England. Great
perils there await me; but Jesus Christ will send his angel,
and roll away every stone of difficulty. In his strength alone
is my trust, and for his sake and in his name, I subscribe my-
self, reverend and dear Sir,
Your affectionate brother and fellow-laborer in the Lord,
G. W.
LETTER CCLXIV
To Mr. J— H, at Bethesda,
On board the Minerva, Feb. 18, 1741.
My dear Friend and Brother,
YESTERDAY we humbled ourselves before God, and
by prayer and fasting sought for a blessing and direction
in all our affairs. I wish I had kept family fasts at Savannah.
Suppose you had one monthly at Bethesda? You will see, by
dear Brother B's letter, the frame of my mind. Since that,
I have been a little in the valley, but the Lord is my com-
forter. I hope I grow in grace, and in the knowledge of my-
self, and the Lord Jesus Christ. My heart is much united
to Messrs. W J, though we differ in some particulars. May
God make us of one mind, as well as heart. I shall make all
possible haste back, and remit money to you as often as I can.
Mr. P tells me, his brother is to send you upwards of a
hundred pounds, and I suppose other supplies will be sent from
the Northward. I have also wrote to Charles-Town. I am per-
suaded God will not let you want. I would not have any-
thing left undone, that is necessary for the family's comfort-
able subsistence. The Lord is our Shepherd, therefore we
shall not lack. I shall long to hear how the blessed Jesus
deals with you. He is wonderfully gracious unto me, and hath
made this voyage profitable to my soul. O my friend, my
friend, the Lord be with you. My love is firm to you at the
bottom, though sometimes it hath ebbed and flowed; in heaven
it will not be so. On earth it is needful it should; otherwise,
how should we learn to cease from man? But I am a worm and
no man, and deserve to be the outcast of all people. My eyes
are now ready to gush out with water. O the sovereign love
of Christ in choosing me! My dear friend, let us study to
be holy even as he is holy, and walk even as he also walked.
Let these be your daily questions; "Am I more like Christ?
Am I more meek and patient? Does my practice correspond
with my knowledge, and am I a light to enlighten and en-
flame all that are around me?" I could say more, but I think
to write again when I get on shore. God bless you and yours.
I suppose you have heard that Mr. P sails with
Your affectionate friend, brother, and servant in Christ,
G. W.
LETTER CCLXV
To Mr. S— W—, at Bristol.
On board the Minerva, Feb. 20, 1741.
AND does my friend W— look again towards God?
Never did the Father with greater joy receive the re-
turning prodigal, than I shall embrace you in these unworthy
arms, if you are alive to God. I trust your late tepidity will
now make you more fervent in spirit. I pray God to give
you a settlement in Christ, that you may be rooted and
grounded in love. My brother, the captain, gave me a parti-
cular account of your soul. I hope he will yet appear for God;
will you also appear with him? Why should you strive to
please a pleasure-taking world? Why should you keep in league
with the apparent enemies of God? But no more of this.
Let old things pass away, let all things become new. I believe
God suffered you to fall, because you thought more highly of
yourself than you ought to think. My love to all. I feel
a great union of soul with Mr. W—; we differ in principles,
but I hope the Lord will make us of one mind. You must
not be surprised if I publish an answer to Mr. John W's
sermon, entitled "Free Grace." It is wrote in much love and
meekness. Adieu for the present. Give thanks on my be-
half. The Lord hath dealt wonderfully kind with dear
Mr. W—
Yours eternally in Christ,
G. W.
LETTER CCLXVI
To Mr. T— S—, in London.
My dear Brother, On board the Minerva, Feb. 20, 1741.
I have kept your letter by me till now, that I might answer
it on my voyage. It speaks the language of a perplexed
heart, and plainly shows me that Satan loves to keep us in
bondage. My dear Brother, I think you have done wrong in
holding your peace. I am sure you once felt that freedom of
soul, which you are a stranger to now. The way of duty is
the way of safety. Whatever you may say to the contrary,
unless you will give the lie to your own experiences, you must
confess, that you have indeed tasted of the good word of life.
You should, therefore, have went forwards, and not have
turned back again, and thereby plunged yourself into dark-
ness; darkness that may be felt. Alas, you have too eagerly
embraced principles (I fear) contrary to the gospel of Christ.
You are aiming at a false voluntary humility, and are return-
ing back to the flesh pots of Egypt. I know my words will
have but little force with some, but I must deliver my soul.
God was once pleased to work upon you by my ministry, and
therefore I am more solicitous for your welfare. I know the
advice you would give me is, "be still." I hope I am, so far
as really to know the Lord; but yet I will strive, yet will
I walk in all the ordinances of God, and go on from strength
to strength till I come to appear before him in his heavenly
Zion. I write this, out of the fulness of my heart. Indeed
I love you, and the brethren; I am willing to be the servant
of you all. I am less than the least. However, I dare not
embrace tenets that are not agreeable to the form of sound
words. Let me see you as soon as may be after my arrival,
and in the mean while accept of hearty love, from
Your affectionate brother and servant in Christ,
G. W.
LETTER CCLXVII
To Mrs. A. D.
My dear Sister, On board the Minerva Feb. 20, 1741.
My conscience almost reproaches me, that I have not
wrote to you often, nor full enough; accept this as an
acknowledgment of my fault. I am sorry for it. We are
now about a thousand miles off England, I hope this will
provoke you to send me a letter immediately after my arrival.
I find Luther's observation to be true:
"Times of reforma-
tion are times of confusion;" as yet the churches in America
are quiet, but I expect a sifting time ere long. My family
in Georgia was once sadly shaken, but now, blessed be God,
it is settled, and, I hope, established in the doctrines of
grace. Your name is precious among them. I wish you
would send them a long letter. Your book on walking with
God has been blessed to one Mr. B, and others in South
Carolina. It hath also been serviceable to a dear friend now
with me, as also to myself. I cannot well tell you what great
things are doing abroad, I have a scene of sufferings lying be-
fore me; I expect shortly to cry out with the spouse, "Look
not upon me, because I am black, because the sun hath looked
upon me, my mother's children were angry with me." My
Lord's command, now, I believe, is, "Take the foxes, the
little foxes that spoil the vines; for our vines have tender
grapes."—Help me by your prayers. It is an ease thus to un-
bosom oneself to a friend, and an instance of my confidence
in you. O, my dear Sister, I am less than the least of all
saints, I am the chief of sinners, and yet Jesus loves me, and
sheds his love abroad in my heart abundantly by the Holy
Ghost. I have been much assisted in composing some gospel
sermons, which I intend for the press. I have sought the Lord
by prayer and fasting, and he assures me, that he will be with
me. Whom then should I fear? Hitherto we have had an ex-
traordinary passage, praise the Lord. Herewith I send you
a letter from one of the children which God has given me:
He will rejoice to receive a line from you. If possible, I hope,
though you are in the decline of life, to see you face to face be-
fore I leave England. I should be glad to hear how you are
as to worldly circumstances; if I can help you in any
degree, freely command
Your affectionate friend, brother, and servant
in Christ,
G. W.
LETTER CCLXVIII
To T— K—, at London.
On board the Minerva, Feb. 20, 1741.
I Received your kind letter at Savannah, and though I hope
to see you face to face soon after you receive this, yet love
to your dear soul constrains me to write you an answer before
I come on shore.
I find, since my departure, the brethren have fallen into
errors. Dear Brother K will not be offended, if I say,
"He, I fear, is one of them;" for his letter betrays him.
My dear Brother, you say, "You have been striving a long,
long while, but to very little purpose," &c. By this, I sup-
pose, you have left off the means, and fallen into stillness;
expecting now, that Jesus Christ will so work upon your
heart, that you shall not feel the least stirring of indwelling
corruption in your soul; in short, that you shall be complete-
ly perfect: This was pretty near my case about six years ago,
and now I see why God suffered me thus to be tempted,
"that I might be more capable of succouring my brethren,
now they are tempted." My dear Brother, let us reason to-
gether. "You have been striving (you say) a long while, but
to very little purpose." And what then? must you be there-
fore still, and drive no more? God forbid: No, you are yet
to wait at the pool. "Constantly attend on ordinances;" and
who knows but by-and-by the loving Saviour may pass by and
visit your soul. Have you not, in some degree at least, felt his
divine power in the use of the means? Why should not that en-
courage you to expect more in the same way? But you say, "I
find all that is of self is sin." And do you expect ever to do
anything, or to offer up to God one sacrifice, without a mix-
ture of sin in it? If you do, indeed you are building a spiritual
Babel. My dear Brother, even our most holy thoughts are
tinctured with sin, and want the atonement of the Mediator;
and therefore, if you leave off striving, because "whatever
is of self is sin," you must never attempt to do any duty what-
ever again. Your stillness hath as much a mixture of self
in it, as your striving, and if you proceed in this manner, you
must become a professed Quietist. Six weeks did Satan keep
me under this delusion, but the Lord helped me in the hour
of extremity: May he also help my dear Brother K!
Another error you seem to be fallen into is, "that a man
cannot be a Christian, at least that he is a very weak one, so
long as he finds corruption stirring in his heart." If I was to
urge the seventh to the Romans, you would say, St. Paul only
speaks of a man under first-awakenings, and not of a convert-
ed man; but my dear Brother, did you ever know a man, that
was not really converted, delight in the law of God after the
inner man? And yet such an one the Apostle speaks of in
the latter part of that chapter. Be not deceived, we are to be
holy as Christ is holy; we are to receive grace for grace;
every grace that is in the blessed Jesus, is to be transplanted
into our hearts; we are to be delivered from the power, but
not from the indwelling and being of sin in this life. Hereafter,
we are to be presented blameless, without spot, or wrinkle, or
any such thing. If you labour after any other perfection here,
you will labour in vain. St. Paul had attained no other, when
he wrote to the Philippians, and to the other churches: But
my dear Brother K seems to think, "I did wrong in
writing to Mr. H to know his sentiments upon several
texts of scripture, and in sending for several of Calvin's books."
And why, my dear Brother, was this wrong? Why you say,
"you think it is contrary to St. Paul in his Epistles, when
he says, he would not speak other men's words;" but St. Paul
says no such thing: The place you aim at, I believe, is 2 Cor.
X. 16. "And not to boast in another man's line, of things
made ready to our hand." My dear Brother, examine the
context, and you will find the Apostle means no more than
that he would not enter into other men's labours, as ver. 15.
He would not preach where churches were already settled, but
go where the gospel had not been delivered. This, and this
only, is the meaning of the passage, which dear mistaken Mr.
K has wrongly quoted. My dear Brother, did not St.
Paul bid Timothy to give himself to reading? What, if the Holy
Spirit is to lead us into all truth, does not the Holy Spirit
make use of, and lead us by the means? Has he not indited
the scriptures? Has he not helped holy men to explain those
scriptures? And why may I not, in a due subordination
to the Holy Spirit, make use of those men's writings? Has
not my dear Brother K bought sermons? And why then
does "He make use of other men's words?" O, my dear
brother, you are in the wilderness; God bring you safe out
of it.
I suppose, because the Dissenters oppose some of your new
principles, you term them enemies; but, my dear Brother,
though there are many Christless talkers, and hypocritical
formalists among the Dissenters, as no doubt there are some
such in the purest church under heaven; yet many of them
hold and practice the truth as it is in Jesus. But I have
done. Count me not your enemy, because I tell you the
truth. I expect that great numbers will look shy on me, for
thus opposing what I think to be error. Thus the Galatians
treated St. Paul; but I must be tried every way. I could
add a thousand kind things, but I hope you shortly will have
a personal interview with
Your affectionate brother and servant in Christ,
G. W.

LETTER CCLXIX
To Mrs. J— F—, in Charles-Town.
On board the Minerva, Feb. 25, 1741.
My very dear Friend,
I know you will rejoice at the receipt of this: You have
abundant reason; the Lord hath been wondrous kind.
We are now flying on the wings of the wind, and if it con-
tinues, we hope to be at Charles-Town the beginning of next week.
Your kind presents were of great service to my crazy body.
The woman passenger has been serviceable in making us bread;
and in short, God has wonderfully ordered all things for our
great convenience and comfort. O that my dear friends at
Charles-Town, may hereby be excited to thankfulness on our
behalf. I have frequently prayed for you both with my friends,
and when in secret before the Lord. Indeed you are seldom
out of mind. Dear Mrs. F, I believe God sent you to
invite me to your house, and I believe the Lord will plenti-
fully reward both of you, for all your works of faith and la-
bors of love. I think henceforward I must call you sister,
and your husband, I hope, will be truly styled James the servant
of the Lord. I trust you will both serve the Lord Christ,
and give yourselves up to the guidance of his blessed word and
providences day by day. It is a glorious privilege to be led
by the Spirit of God. I think I have felt, and do feel, at this
time, his sacred influences upon my soul. My body is but
weak, though better by much than when I left Charles-Town;
however, my soul hath confidence in God. The archers
will shoot sorely at me that I may fall; but God will cause
my bow to abide in strength, and my arms shall be strengthen-
ed by the hands of the mighty God of Jacob. I need not ask
for a continuance of your prayers, nor you for mine. I hope
we shall be always present with each other in spirit, at the
throne of grace. My dear friend, adieu: All with me salute
you. Write often to
Your unworthy guest, but truly affectionate servant,
friend, and brother in the Lord,
G. W.
LETTER CCLXX
To Mrs. F—, in Charles-Town.
On board the Minerva, Feb. 25, 1741.
I hope dear Mrs. F will not be offended with these few
lines; they are written with a sincere desire to promote
your welfare. I want to see you entirely dead to the world
and alive to God. You have been often convinced under the
word; may it sink deep into your heart. God, by the late
fire, hath shown you the vanity of all things here below; hence-
forward set your affections on things above. You are old,
and at the head of a great family; you have sealed your pro-
mise to lead a holy life, more than once, by receiving the sym-
bols of the blessed body and blood of Christ.
Be not ashamed to own you have vowed never to dance
again: Dear Mrs. F, fear not contempt. What is it?
only a little breath. Rest not in duties; rest not in outward
partial reformation.—He that is in Christ, is a new creature.
That old things may pass away, and all things become new
in your heart, is the hearty prayer of. Madam,
Your sincere friend and servant in Christ,
G. W.
LETTER CCLXXI
To the Rev. Mr. C—, in Boston.
On board the Minerva, Feb. 16, 1741.
Reverend and dear Sir,
ACCEPT a few lines from one, who desires feelingly
to style himself, less than the least of all. I hope you
received my packet from Charles-Town: What happened to
me there, was only an earnest of future trials. God hath
blessed the reading of the prophecy of the prophet Jeremiah to
my soul; as also the history of Joseph, and hath let me see
more into the covenant of redemption between the Father and
the Son: I am more and more in love with the good old Pur-
itans; I am pleased at the thoughts of sitting down hereafter
with the venerable Cotton, Norton, Elliot, and that great cloud
of witnesses, which first crossed the Western ocean for the
sake of the gospel, and faith once delivered to the saints. At
present, my soul is so filled, that I can scarce proceed. Dear
Sir, God is with me of a truth; he now gives me a feeling
possession of himself: I bless his holy name for sending me to
sea; it is profitable both for soul and body. I find the
Psalmist's words to be true, "The secret of the Lord is with
them that fear him." O that I may walk humbly with my
God! The language of my soul is this:
And now, dear Mr. C, I have in some measure un-
bosomed my heart. What shall I say more? Pray for me
both in public and private;
give thanks, as well as pray,
especially for the mercies of this voyage. Dear Sir, adieu till
I come on shore, which I hope will be very speedily, being
now in soundings; then you shall hear again, God willing,
from
Your truly affectionate friend, brother, and servant,
G. W.
LETTER CCLXXII
To Mr. J— H—.
My dear Sir, London, March 25. 1741.
I Wrote to you immediately on my coming on shore. We
arrived at Falmouth last Wednesday was sevennight, and got
here the Sunday following. —Blessed be God, we had a sum-
mer's passage. Many of our friends, I find, are sadly divided,
and, as far as I am able to judge, have been sadly misled.
Congregations at Moorfields, and Kennington Common, on Sun-
day, were as large as usual. —On the following week days,
quite contrary: Twenty thousand dwindled down to two or
three hundred. It has been a trying time with me. A large
orphan family, consisting of near a hundred, to be maintain-
ed, about four thousand miles off, without the least fund, and
in the dearest part of his Majesty's dominions; also, above 2
thousand pounds in debt for them, and not worth twenty
pounds in the world of my own, and threatened to be arrested
for three hundred and fifty pounds, drawn for in favour of the
Orphanhouse, by my late dear deceased friend and fellow-
traveller Mr. S. My Bookseller, who, I believe, has got
some hundreds by me, being drawn away by the M-ns, re-
fuses to print for me; and many, very many of my spiritual
children, who, at my last departure from England, would have
plucked out their own eyes to have given to me, are so prejudiced
by the dear Messrs. N.'s dressing up the doctrine of Election
in such horrible colours, that they will neither hear, see, nor
give me the least assistance: Yea, some of them send threaten-
ing letters, that God will speedily destroy me. As for the
people of the world, they are so embittered by my injudicious
and too severe expressions against Archbishop Tillotson, and the
Author of the old Duty of Man, that they fly from me as from
a viper; and what is most cutting of all, I am now con-
strained, on account of our differing in principles, publicly to
separate from my dear, dear old friends Messrs. J— and C—,
whom I still love as my own soul: But, through
infinite mercy, I am enabled to strengthen myself in the Lord
my God. I am cast down but not destroyed, perplexed
but not in despair. A few days ago, in reading Beza's Life of
Calvin, these words were much pressed upon me, "Calvin is
turned out of Geneva, but, behold a new church arises!" —
Jesus, the ever loving, altogether lovely Jesus, pities and
comforts me. My friends are creating a place, which I have
called a Tabernacle, for morning's exposition. I have not, nor
can I as yet, make any collections; but let us not fear.—Our
heavenly Father, with whom the fatherless find mercy, will
yet provide; let us only seek first the kingdom of God, and
his righteousness, and all other necessary things shall be added
unto us. In about a fortnight, though I scarce know an oak
from a hickory, or one kind of land from another, I am sub-
poena'd to appear before parliament, to give an account of the
condition of the province of Georgia, when I left it. This, I
suppose, is occasioned by the party, which hath been so in-
veterate against the honourable the trustees, whom they accuse
of misemploying the public monies. The event, which un-
doubtedly will be in favour of the trust, you may know here-
after. In the mean while, believe me to be
Yours most affectionately,
G. W.
LETTER CCLXXIII
To Mr. J— C—.
My dear Brother, London, March 25. 1741.
HASTEN hither with all speed, and then we shall see
what God intends to do for and by us. It is a trying
time now in the church.—The Lord give us a due mixture
of the lamb and lion. Some that have been led astray, begin
to recover. The Lord make way for his own truths. My
love to the Colliers and all friends. Many, I suppose, will be shy.
I am become a monster even to several who were wrought upon
by my ministry; but it must needs be that offences should come:
otherwise, how should I learn to cease from man? Adieu;
excuse brevity—Hasten, and speak face to face with
Yours most affectionately in Christ Jesus,
G. W.
LETTER CCLXXIV
To Mr. H—.
My very dear Friend, London April 10, 1741.
I Ordered Mr. H to send you some sermons and ac-
counts, some time ago: I suppose he has done it. I have
been at the Parliament-house; the Georgia Affair was adjourned.
The gentlemen seemed apprehensive that my account of
the colony, would have too much weight. It was somewhat
of a trial to be in the House. I then remembered what the
Apostle said, "We are become a spectacle to men and to
angels." My appeal will come to nothing, I believe. I have
waited upon the Speaker; he received me kindly. I cannot
yet determine when I shall see you. If you fear, I hope you
will pray for me. The Lord blesses my ministry. Salute
dear Mrs. H; I will write to her next; but you two
are one. The Lord be with you both. At present I am
weak in body, and therefore must beg leave to subscribe
myself
Yours, &c.
G. W.
LETTER CCLXXV
To Mr. S-- M--, at London.
My dear Friend and Brother, Bristol, April 27, 1741.
ON Tuesday, April 22d, I left London, and preached on
Wednesday and Thursday morning at Newbury, to large
congregations. On Friday evening I preached at Bridg, and
have continued to do so twice every day to great and affected
auditories. I received your kind letter, and thank you for it.
I rejoice in the good news from New-England. Last night, I
rejoiced much in seeing a soul wonderfully exult in God, just
at the borders of death. Great manifestations of the divine
presence have attended my sermons. "Praise the Lord, O
my soul! I am glad to find Mr. S goes on well. Pray
give my love to brother G. My body is sometimes weak,
but my soul rejoices in God my Saviour. I know not whether
I shall come so soon as proposed to London. I find it
necessary, through the increase of awakened souls, to get a
society-room built adjoining to our new tabernacle. I pray
God to fill it with his glory, and beg leave to subscribe my-
self, dear Mr. M,
Your affectionate friend, brother and servant in Christ,
G. W.
LETTER CCLXXVI
To Mr. H— H—.
My dear Brother, Bristol, April 28, 1741.
BLESSED be God for knitting us together in love.
May it continue, and increase till consummated in eter-
nity! The Lord Jesus direct you. It is now a trying time
with the church. Our Lord is now chiefly wounded in the
house of his friends. The Lord keep us both from a party
spirit on one hand, and from too much rashness and positive-
ness on the other. I speak thus, because you seem offended
that some affirm, "That there is no such thing as dominion
over indwelling sin, nor rest from working for life wholly."
Now this is certainly true in one sense. We shall never have
such a dominion over indwelling sin, as entirely to be deliver-
ed from the stirring of it; and the greatest saint cannot be as-
sured, but some time or other for his humiliation, or punishment
for unfaithfulness, God may permit it to break out into
some actual breach of his law, and in a gross way too. Let
us not be high-minded, but fear. It is equally true, that we
shall not rest wholly from working for life; for whilst there
is any part of us unregenerate, that part will be always lead-
ing us to the old covenant. Luther often complained of the
propensity of his heart this way. If we know ourselves, we
shall find it to be so with us; but I suppose you have been
influenced with the doctrine of sinless perfection. No wonder
therefore you write thus. May God give you a right judg-
ment in all things, and enable you rightly to divide the word
of truth! As for assurance, I cannot but think, all who are
truly converted must know that there was a time in which
they closed with Christ: But then, as so many have died
only with an humble hope, and have been even under doubts
and fears, though they could not but be looked upon as chrif-
tians; I am less positive than once I was, lest haply I should
condemn some of God's dear children. The farther we go
in the spiritual life, the more cool and rational shall we be,
and yet more truly zealous. I speak this by experience. Dear
brother H will not be angry with me. I hope, and be-
lieve, you pray for me. The Lord Jesus carries me on.
Many have been convinced at London, I preach here twice
daily, to large congregations, with great power. The Lord,
I believe, will yet bring mighty things to pass. I am, dear H--,
Your most affectionate brother
in our dear Lord Jesus,
G. W.
LETTER CCLXXVII
To the Rev. Mr. S—.
Rev. and dear Sir, Bristol, May 1, 1741.
I Am glad to hear by brother M, that the Lord is
with you. May you increase with all the increase of God.
The more we do, the more we may do for the dear Lord
Jesus. He strengthens me here mightily.—I am enabled to
speak here with great power, rather greater than when at Lon-
don. My congregations are as large as usual, and they go
refreshed away. This is the Lord's doings; may all that is
within us praise his holy name! Exhort the dear London people
to pray for us. The Lord be with you all. Dear Sir, pray
Your affectionate brother and unworthy
fellow-labourer in our Lord,
G. W.
LETTER CCLXXVIII
To Mr. S—, at Worcester.
Reverend and dear Sir, Gloucester, May 5, 1741.
WITH this, I send you my answer to brother Wesley's
sermon, and my account of the Orphan-house. I
have seen your letter to Mr. N, and thank you for espous-
ing the cause of a poor despised minister of Jesus Christ. I
hope as I make advances in the spiritual life, I shall show my
zeal more and more tempered with true Christian knowledge
and prudence. I would willingly have none of my wildfire
mingled with the sacred fire that comes down from God's
altar. I desire not only to do things for God, but to do them
in the best manner. I am a poor unworthy sinner, and yet,
(O sovereign grace!) the Lord works by me day by day. At
Bristol, error is in a great measure put a stop to. The Lord
manifested himself in the great congregation there, and doth
likewise here. Last night, we saw and felt his power. I have
had the pleasure of seeing dear Mr. P, and I long for that
time when I shall see you, Reverend Sir, and all the chosen
of God in the kingdom of heaven. But I desire to wait till
my change shall come. Dear Sir, be pleased to pray for me.
I have prayed for you often. I am a weak sinful worm. As
such pray remember, Reverend Sir,
Your affectionate though unworthy brother
and servant in Christ,
G. W.
LETTER CCLXXIX
To Mr. Wm. W, at Edinburgh.
Dear Sir, Bristol, May 16, 1741.
I Received both your kind letters, and with this send you my
hearty thanks for them. I also thank you for your kind
invitation to me to Scotland. God only knows when I can
come. —All I can say at present is, I will come when the
Lord permits. Sad tares have been sown here. It will re-
quire some time to pluck them up. The doctrines of the gos-
pel are sadly run down, and most monstrous errors propagated.
They assert, "That the very in-being of sin must be taken
out of us, or otherwise we are not new creatures." O dear
Sir, exhort all to pray for me, that I may be faithful to my
Lord, and yet kept gentle in my temper. At present, our
dear Lord causes me to triumph in every place. His gospel
gets ground, and his power is manifested among us day by
day. The fields are white, everywhere ready unto harvest.
Our Lord I trust will gather his wheat into his heavenly gar-
ners. My kind respects attend Mr. M and Mr. D.
Had I time I would write a long letter to each. But I am
interrupted. However, I am glad to snatch a few moments to
beg a continuance of your prayers for a poor unworthy worm,
and to assure you that I am, dear Sir,
Your affectionate brother and servant in Christ,
G. W.
LETTER CCLXXX
To Mr, E E, at Sterling.
Reverend and dear Sir, Bristol May 16, 1741.
I Owe you much love. Only want of time prevents my
writing to you oftener. This morning I received a kind
letter from your brother Ralph, who thinks it best for me
wholly to join the associate presbytery, if it should please God
to send me into Scotland. This I cannot altogether come into.
I come only as an occasional preacher, to preach the simple
gospel to all that are willing to hear me, of whatever denomi-
nation. It will be wrong in me to join in a reformation as to
church government, any further than I have light given me
from above. If I am quite neuter as to that in my preach-
ing, I cannot see how it can hinder or retard any design you
may have on foot. My business seems to be, to evangelize, to
be a Presbyter at large. When I shall be sent into your parts
I know not. I write this, that there may not be the least
misunderstanding between us. I love and honour the asso-
ciate Presbytery in the bowels of Jesus Christ. With this
I send them my due respects, and most humbly beg their pray-
ers. But let them not be offended, if in all things I cannot
immediately fall in with them. Let them leave me to God.
Whatever light he has pleased to give me, I hope I shall be
faithful to it. Our dear and precious master still carries me
on. God enables me to fight my way through. The gospel
doctrines, I believe, will yet prevail. I feel a divine power
attending my ministrations. I preach twice daily, and am
invited to many places. I believe the Lord intends to keep
me on this side the water for some time. Blessed be God,
all places are alike to me. O dear Sir, pray for me. —I am a
poor unworthy worm. I love you tenderly, but am almost
ashamed to subscribe myself
Your brother in the best of bonds,
G. W.

LETTER CCLXXXI
To D— A—, In London.
I Am glad to receive a line once again from dear brother
A . I rejoice that God lets you see more and more
into the corruptions of your heart. The more perfect you are,
the more will you see and bewail your imperfections in thought,
word, and deed; the more will you be made to sing, "In
the Lord alone, and not in myself, have I complete righte-
ousness and strength." The doctrine of electing love, is pre-
cious to my soul. I am enabled to speak of it feelingly to
others. My soul is kept in peace and sweetness. Our Lord's
cause needs not noise and rashness. I desire that none of my
wild-fire may be mixed with the pure fire of holy zeal coming
from God's altar. I think it my duty to wait, to go on simply
in preaching the everlasting gospel, and I believe we shall
yet see the salvation of God. Methinks, the cloud begins to
break off your mind; I pray God to keep you from extremes.
Brother H is more and more enlightened; but withal,
more and more quickened every day. He finds there is no
such thing as sinless perfection, and yet is pressing after holiness
of heart and life rather more than ever. May God make my
dear brother A thus minded! For indeed I love him
in the bowels of Jesus Christ. We have had frequently
sweet communion with God, and one another. I should have
rejoiced to have conversed with you at Bristol. This is my
comfort, yet a little while and we shall converse in the king-
dom of heaven, forever and ever. My soul is waiting for
this salvation. I know not when I shall go to America.
When I do, you shall have timely notice. God blesses my
ministry, wherever he sends me. I am invited to fresh places
daily. Dear Mr. A , I, even worthless I, subscribe my-
self,
Yours most affectionately in the loving Jesus,
G. W.
LETTER CCLXXXII
To Mr. I— C—.
Dear Brother C—, Bristol, May 18, 1741
I Received your letter this morning, and am just setting out
for Wiltshire. The Lord hath been much with us.
Yesterday I preached three times. At every sermon, a sweet
melting was observed in the congregation. Last night I gave
your sister the sacrament; she is recovering. I afterwards,
administered the sacrament at Mr. T 's, and had a love feast,
Jesus was in the midst of us. I know not but I may come
towards London next week. I wonder not at your heaviness.
—Before every increase of your work, you must expect some
trials. Humblings are necessary for your spirit, and mine. I
return my love to all. I must away. Brother H rejoices
in spirit, and joins with me, who am.
Ever yours in Christ,
G. W.
LETTER CCLXXXIII
To the Rev. Mr. J.
My dear Brother, Bristol, May 23, 1741.
I Bless God for making anything of mine useful to your
soul. May the blessed Jesus breathe upon you day by day,
and make you eminently useful to the church of God. I
think you write with a kind of prophetic spirit. The Lord
only knows how he will be pleased to dispose of me. Great
afflictions I am sure of having, and a sudden death, blessed
be God, will not be terrible. I know that my redeemer liveth.
I every day long to see him, that I may be free from the re-
mainder of sin, and enjoy him without interruption forever-
more, I desire patiently to wait, till my blessed change shall
come. The Lord hath been with me here. There is a
great awakening in Wiltshire, and the work is most wonder-
fully carried on in New-England. I hope to send you a letter,
shortly, that will rejoice your heart. I leave Bristol, and go
through Wiltshire to London next Monday. —I then purpose
going to Staffordshire, and then through Wales to Scotland. A
wider door than ever is opened for preaching the everlasting
gospel. I have now only time to beg your prayers, and to
assure you that I am
Your most affectionate though weak and unworthy
brother and servant in Christ,
G. W.
LETTER CCLXXXIV
To Mr. I R , at Philadelphia.
Dear I , Bristol, May 23, 1741.
I Rejoice to find, that you see, feel, and bewail, the plague
of your heart. May the Lord show it you more and
more! It will excite your love to the dear Lord Jesus more
fervently.—I return my love to your sister. I thought ere now
she had been with Jesus. I believe, she has the grace of God
in truth, and therefore our Lord will make her conqueror over
all. I am glad to hear of the success of the gospel in Boston.
It is a gathering time there, but a winnowing time with us
here. All is ordered for the good of the church, by Christ
Jesus: Let us, my dear brother, keep close to him in this
and every trying time. We shall find but few, very few, true
followers of the Lamb of God. May you and I be in the
happy number! God is pleased to give success to the word
preached. Though I am opposed much, Jesus is my strength.
The Lord will enable me to fight his battles. My love to
Peggy and all that love Jesus. Forget not to pray for
Your affectionate friend and servant in Christ,
G. W.
LETTER CCLXXXV
To Mr. r .
Dear Sir, Bristol, May 23, 1741.
I Am glad to receive a letter from you. I was fearful, lest I
had done something to offend you. I thank you and the
other gentlemen for their kind invitation of me to Scotland. I
believe it will be near three months before I can see Edinburgh.
On Monday I set out for London: then I purpose, God willing,
to go into Essex, and then to return through Bristol and Wales
in my way to you. I entreat all the brethren to pray for me,
that I may come in the fullness of the blessing of the gospel
of Christ. I am a poor, weak, unworthy worm. God
hath been with me here, and in Gloucestershire. In Wiltshire
there is a great awakening. Abroad in New-England the
work goes on wonderfully. O dear Sir, never was such a
weak wr&ch sent on such an important errand. I have
many trials of various kinds. Jesus supports me; Jesus
makes me more than conqueror. He is a dear and a
tender master. Dear Sir, help me to praise him. I will
write to all the gentlemen that wrote to me, if I can
any way redeem time. In the meanwhile, be pleased to
remember me to them in the kindest manner, and believe
me to be
Your affectionate though unworthy brother
and servant in Christ,
G. W.
LETTER CCLXXXVI
To Mr, J EI , at Savannah
London, June 1, 1741.
My very dear Friend and Brother,
I Received a short letter from you, but it was dated in Janu-
ary last.—I have sent several to Georgia, and lately also a
parcel of things for the children. God appears much in our
congregations. We seldom or never have a dry meeting. As
to outward things, I never was more embarrassed; but my con-
solations are equivalent. Praise the Lord, O my soul! I am
apprehensive of no opposition from the government. I have
waited on the Speaker. He treated me kindly, and assured
me that there would be no persecution in this king's reign;
they know I am loyal from principle, but I believe I shall yet
be greatly humbled. The story of Joseph in the prison, and
David in his troubles before he came to the throne, has been
much and comfortably pressed upon my soul. I hope you en-
joy peace! May the Lord bless you and the whole household.
I am sometimes enabled to pray with great faith for you all.
The Lord will yet provide. I am to preach thrice today. It
is now past five in the morning. I am going to the tabernacle
lately erected for a morning lecture. We have sweet meet-
ings, blessed be God! In the bowels of our common Jesus,
I subscribe myself
Yours eternally,
G. W.
LETTER CCLXXXVII
To Mr. I, C , at Bristol
London, June 3, 1741.
I have enjoyed the especial presence of God ever since I
came to London. I preach three times daily. The Lord
is remarkably with me. Congregations increase. I am going
to have a society-room joined to the tabernacle. The Lord is
really on our side. —O let us be meek and quiet! O let us
wait, and we shall see the salvation of God. I preach daily
at Deptford. Our dear Master helps me to preach and pray
with great power. Your ministry hath been blessed. Let us
both give all the glory to everlasting Love. Salute the dear
brethren. Remember me most kindly to all in Wine-Street.
Ever yours in the blessed Jesus,
G. W.
LETTER CCLXXXVIII
To Mr. R E, at Aberdeen.
Reverend and dear Sir, London, June 4, 1741.
I have now a little time to myself. I must improve it and
answer your kind letter. Blessed be God, for enabling
me to write anything that may be of service to his church,
and of comfort to your soul. Glory be to our dear and com-
mon Lord, his cause here succeeds. Truth gets ground.
The Lord strengthens me mightily. His power is manifested
in our congregations. Conversion work is going on apace
among us. I am not yet determined about the exact time of
coming to Scotland: but I believe, I shall be with you in
about three months. I can't but think the associate presbytery
are a little too hard upon me. If I am neuter as to the par-
ticular reformation of church government till I have further
light, it will be enough. I come simply to preach the gospel,
and to be received only as an occasional itinerant preacher by
all, and not to enter into any particular connection whatever.
The Lord, I hope, will order my goings in his ways. I de-
sire to hear frequently from you. I have need of your prayers.
My trials are great, my comforts far greater. I am a poor
worm, and yet Jesus delights to honor me. We are likely
to have settled societies in several places. Jesus rides on from
conquering to conquer. I am, Reverend and dear Sir,
Your unworthy fellow-laborer and affectionate
brother and servant in Christ,
G. W.